【0】PATHOLOGY.—

【1】Age.—• This is one of the earliest swellings found in the  删除换行1 neck. It may be noted within several days to several months  删除换行1 after birth.

【2】SYMPTOMS.— The mother often notices the lump. So  删除换行1 the main complaint is the swelling. She may also find that  删除换行1 the child keeps his head turned to one side — torticollis.

【3】Any attempt to turn the head straight will cause pain. As  删除换行1 the child grows the head becomes turned to one side and  删除换行1 tilted towards the other side — torticollis. It usually does  删除换行1 not appear before the age of 4 years as it becomes obvious  删除换行1 with the growth of the length in neck. At this age the fibrous  删除换行1 contracture of the affected sternomastoid will cause this  删除换行1 deformity.

【4】EXAMINATIONS.— (i) Position.— The sternomastoid  删除换行1 tumour usually lies in the middle of the sternomastoid  删除换行1 muscle i.e. in the middle third of the neck on its lateral side.

【5】(ii) Tenderness.— This tumour may be tender in the  删除换行1 first few weeks, of the life. The child often cries as soon as the  删除换行1 swelling is palpated.

【6】(iii) Size and Shape.— It is usually 1 to 2 cm in diameter.
The swelling is fusiform in shape along the long axis of the  删除换行1 sternomastoid muscle.

【7】(iv) Surface.— The surface is usually smooth.

【8】(v) Edge.— The anterior and posterior edges of the  删除换行1 tumour are distinct but the superior and inferior edges are  删除换行1 indistinct and continuous with the normal sternomastoid  删除换行1 muscle.

【9】(vi) Consistency.— In the beginning the swelling is firm,  删除换行1 but gradually it becomes harder and begins to shrink within  删除换行1 the muscle to become impalpable later on.

【10】(vii) Mobility.— The swelling is mobile sideways but not  删除换行1 along the length of the sternomastoid muscle.

【11】(viii)The regional lymph nodes are not enlarged and  删除换行1 normal.

【12】The neck.— All the movements of the neck should be  删除换行1 examined. The child is too young to move the neck actively as  删除换行1 the clinician advises. Manipulate the head and neck very gently.
Some sort of torticollis may be present. There may be restriction  删除换行1 of movements due to spasm of the sternomastoid muscle.
Otherwise the neck movements may be normal.

【13】Gradually the swelling of the sternomastoid tumour  删除换行1 subsides within a few months, and the sternomastoid muscle  删除换行1 becomes contracted with the development of torticollis. The  删除换行1 nuscle at this stage will feel like a tight cord.

【14】The eyes.— Examine the eyes, particularly the  删除换行1 movements of the eyeball to exclude presence of any squint.

【15】The torticollis may be secondary to squint and not a  删除换行1 sternomastoid tumour.

【16】X-ray.— All cases should be X-rayed to exclude any bony  删除换行1 abnormality e.g. hemivertebra as the primary pathology. But  删除换行1 this is extremely rare.

【17】删除3：<u>Fig.8.13 .— Shows the different positions of the various swellings of  删除换行1 the neck. P — indicates parotid gland; S — indicates submandibular  删除换行1 salivary gland; B — is the branchial cyst; T— is thyroglossal cyst; C— </u>

【18】indicates carotid body tumour; B.F. — is the branchial fistula.

【19】CLINICAL FEATURES.—

【20】(i) If the sternomastoid tumour is noticed at birth,  删除换行1 infant's head is gently manipulated through the full range  删除换行1 of movement everyday. If this is maintained, the muscle will  删除换行1 not get scope to be shortened and torticollis may not appear.

【21】(ii) When the condition is noticed only after the  删除换行1 torticollis has developed —

【22】(a) A brace or harness may be used to correct the  删除换行1 torticollis. Daily physiotherapy should be given to stretch  删除换行1 the affected sternomastoid muscle. But this may not be  删除换行1 successful to correct the deformity.

【23】(b) So operation is the only treatment of choice in  删除换行1 this condition. The best technique is to divide the  删除换行1 sternomastoid muscle at its distal or proximal attachment  删除换行1 by open method. In majority of cases both the heads (sternal  删除换行1 and clavicular) at the lower end are divided by open method.
Subcutaneous tenotomy is a blind technique and should be  删除换行1 avoided in children lest it injures the major blood vessels  删除换行1 deep to the sternomastoid muscle. During division one must  删除换行1 be careful not to injure the spinal accessory nerve or to injure  删除换行1 any blood vessel. Any soft tissue contracture (e.g. deep fascia  删除换行1 etc.) or neighbouring muscle contracture (e.g. scalenus  删除换行1 anterior etc.) should be divided.

【24】Postoperative care.— After operation the neck is kept in  删除换行1 over-corrected position for about 6 months with torticollis  删除换行1 harness. After 6 months physiotherapy should be continued  删除换行1 for both active and passive movements of the neck.

【25】CAROTID BODY TUMOUR (POTATO 删除换行3 TUMOUR; CHEMODECTOMA; NONCHROMAFFIN PARAGANGLIOMA)

【26】What is carotid body ?

【27】Ans : Carotid body is a chemoreceptor organ situated  删除换行1 near the bifurcation of the common carotid artery on each  删除换行1 side. In the carotid body there are receptors which are  删除换行1 stimulated by the rise in the PC02 删除换行1  or H+ concentration of  删除换行1 arterial blood or a decline in its POr

【28】 Hyperventilation is  删除换行1 produced by increase in arterial PC02 删除换行1 . So these are respiratory  删除换行1 chemoreceptors and chemical control of respiration is  删除换行1 adjusted by these chemoreceptors. Carotid body consists of  删除换行1 a number of separate lobules around which there is no true  删除换行1 capsule. Within each lobule there are solid nests of large  删除换行1 pale-staining epitheloid cells or chief cells which are supported  删除换行1 by a connective tissue frame work in which there is spongelike arrangement of capillary sinusoids in addition to  删除换行1 myelinated nerve fibres and ganglion cells. The chief cells  删除换行1 have finely granular eosinophilic cytoplasm and small uniform  删除换行1 nuclei. The carotid body and the aortic body are the chief  删除换行1 chemoreceptors present in the human body. The carotid body  删除换行1 is supplied by the glossopharyngeal nerve whereas the aortic 删除换行1 body is supplied by the vagus nerve. The chief cells are the  删除换行1 chemoreceptor cells. There are also sustentacular cells 删除换行1 surrounded by sinusoidal vessels. The sustentacular cells  删除换行1 appear to be interposed between the blood and the  删除换行1 chemoreceptor cells. The myelinated nerve fibres loose their  删除换行1 myelin sheath and become non-myelinated nerve fibres  删除换行1 which remain in contact with the cell membranes of the  删除换行1 chemoreceptor cells but do not penetrate into these cells.
Each carotid or aortic body is also called glomus. The staining  删除换行1 reactions of glomus tissue suggest that both acetylcholine  删除换行1 and catecholamines are present. The blood flow to each  删除换行1 carotid body is enormous and much more than the blood  删除换行1 flow to the brain and kidney. Carotid body is part of the  删除换行1 non-chromaffin paragangliomas. So carotid body forms a part  删除换行1 of the chemoreceptor system as well as non-chromaffin  删除换行1 paraganglioma.

【29】What are the other sites of chemoreceptors present in the body ?

【30】Ans : (i) The carotid body and (ii) the aortic body are the  删除换行1 two principal chemoreceptors. Besides these there are (iii) 删除换行1 chemoreceptors in the brain stem located near the respiratory  删除换行1 centre itself on the ventral surface of the brain stem. There  删除换行1 are also (iv) pulmonary and (v) myocardial chemoreceptors  删除换行1 in the pulmonary and coronary vessels respectively.

【31】What are the other sites of non-chromaffin paragangliomas 删除换行1 present in the body ?

【32】删除3：<u>Fig.8.14 .— The various locations of non-chromaffin  删除换行1 paragangliomas are demonstrated in this figure.</u>

【33】Ans : (i) The carotid body at the medial aspect of the  删除换行1 common carotid artery at the point of bifurcation, (ii) The 删除换行1 aortic body near the arch of the aorta at the points of origin of  删除换行1 the left coronary artery and the innominate artery, (iii) The 删除换行1 glomus jugulare, which is located in the adventitia of the  删除换行1 jugular bulb, (iv) The glomus intravagale, which is associated  删除换行1 with ganglion nodosum of the vagus nerve, (v) The  删除换行1 paraganglion tympanicum, which is distributed along the  删除换行1 tympanic branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve.

【34】Besides these, tumours of chemoreceptor tissue have been  删除换行1 found (vi) in the femoral canal in relation to the femoral  删除换行1 artery, (vii) in the small bowel mesentery and (viii) in the  删除换行1 retroperitoneum.

【35】DEEP OR PLUNGING RANULA

【36】The tumour is well capsulated. It looks yellow or orange on  删除换行1 cut surface. This is a firm homogeneous and compact tumour,  删除换行1 almost looks like a potato. So it is called the ‘potato tumour’. It  删除换行1 is so intimately adherent to the carotid artery that it is often  删除换行1 impossible to excise the tumour without sacrificing part of the  删除换行1 common, internal or external carotid artery.

【37】Histologically, this tumour is composed of characteristic  删除换行1 cell nests and alveolar arrangements of chief cells. It almost  删除换行1 shows the same histologic pattern of a normal carotid body.
Occasionally this tumour may demonstrate a moderately  删除换行1 severe degree of nuclear pleomorphism. This tumour is 删除换行1 considered to be a benign tumour and remains localised for  删除换行1 years. But regional metastasis occurs in about 20% of cases.
Biologically aggressiveness which gives rise to local or distant  删除换行1 metastasis is seen in less than 5% of cases.

【38】STERNOMASTOID TUMOUR

【39】1. Age.— Highest incidence is seen between the ages of  删除换行1 40 and 60 years of life.

【40】2. Sex.— This tumour occurs with equal frequency in  删除换行1 men and women.

【41】3. Though majority are unilateral, occasionally bilateral  删除换行1 tumours may be seen. Tumours arising in other nonchromaffin paraganglioma may be noticed.

【42】4. A strong familial incidence has been recorded.

【43】5. The main symptom is slow growing painless swelling at  删除换行1 the bifurcation of the common carotid artery. Since the  删除换行1 swelling is painless, it attains the size of at least a plum before  删除换行1 the patient comes to a clinician. It increases in size very slowly.

【44】6. Usually there is a long history.

【45】7. If the lesion lies deep to the bifurcation of the carotid  删除换行1 artery, compression of the oesophagus or larynx is the first  删除换行1 complaint.

【46】8. Horner's syndrome may be present.' Similarly there  删除换行1 may be unilateral paralysis of the vocal cord.

【47】9. Patient may suffer from symptoms of transient cerebral  删除换行1 ischaemia, e.g. blackouts, transient paraesthesia or paralysis.
But these are rare since compression of the carotid artery by 删除换行1 the tumour is very slow. Pressure on the tumour may give  删除换行1 rise to syncopal attack.

【48】Examinations.—

【49】(i) Position.— This tumour is situated at the bifurcation  删除换行1 of the common carotid artery and therefore is seen in the  删除换行1 upper part of the anterior triangle of the neck at the level of  删除换行1 the upper border of the thyroid cartilage or just below the  删除换行1 level of the hyoid bone, under cover of the anterior edge of  删除换行1 the sternomastoid muscle. The tumour is beneath the  删除换行1 anterior edge of the sternomastoid muscle and deep to the  删除换行1 deep cervical fascia.

【50】(ii) Tenderness and temperature.— This tumour is not  删除换行1 tender or hot and the overlying skin looks normal.

【51】(iii) Size.— Carotid body tumour varies in size from 2  删除换行1 cm to 10 cm in diameter.

【52】(iv) Shape.— Carotid body tumour is initially a round  删除换行1 shaped swelling, but as it grows bigger, it becomes irregular  删除换行1 in shape, with narrower lower end which is caught between  删除换行1 the bifurcation of the common carotid artery.

【53】(v) Surface.— The surface is usually smooth, but it may  删除换行1 be slightly bosselated.

【54】(vi) Edge.— The edge is usually distinct.

【55】(vii) Consistency.— The majority of these tumours are  删除换行1 solid and hard. This is called potato tumour.

【56】(viii) Pulsation.— This tumour sometimes, not always,  删除换行1 pulsates. This may be a transmitted pulsation as the tumour  删除换行1 lies on the carotid artery. Sometimes the external carotid  删除换行1 artery runs over the superficial aspect of the tumour and  删除换行1 this causes a pulsating tumour (expansile pulsation).

【57】Occasionally this tumour may be so vascular that it pulsates  删除换行1 (expansile pulsation).

【58】(ix) Mobility.— This tumour cannot be moved vertically,  删除换行1 though it can be moved sideways.

【59】(x) Lymph nodes.— The regional lymph nodes are  删除换行1 usually not enlarged.

【60】Differential Diagnosis.—

【61】1. Cervical lymph node enlargement, whatever may be  删除换行1 the pathology.

【62】2. Sternomastoid tumour.

【63】3. Branchial cyst.

【64】4. Aneurysm of the carotid artery.

【65】5. Thyroid gland enlargement.

【66】6. Aberrant lateral thyroid.

【67】Special Investigations.—

【68】1. Arteriography will definitely diagnose the condition and  删除换行1 it will show splayed carotid fork due to presence of tumour  删除换行1 at the bifurcation. It may show the abnormal tumour vessels  删除换行1 within the tumour.

【69】2. Open biopsy is definitely confirmatory, but is dangerous  删除换行1 as it may injure the carotid artery.

【70】Treatment.—

【71】Surgical excision is the only treatment available in this  删除换行1 condition.

【72】(i) In case of old individuals with a long history the  删除换行1 tumour may be left as it is without any interference.

【73】(ii) Otherwise in all cases the tumour should be explored  删除换行1 by an adequate incision. If the tumour can be dissected easily  删除换行1 from the carotid artery, it should be removed.

【74】(iii) When the tumour is large and inseparable from the  删除换行1 carotid artery, the tumour should be resected alongwith the  删除换行1 bifurcation of the carotid artery. In such cases it is essential  删除换行1 to maintain the blood supply to the brain by a temporary  删除换行1 by-pass system. After excision of the tumour alongwith the  删除换行1 bifurcation of the carotid artery, continuity of the arteries is  删除换行1 restored by dacron graft or autogenous vein graft.

【75】(iv) This tumour is radio-resistant.

【76】(v) General surgeons if come across carotid body tumour  删除换行1 where adequate facilities are not available they may simply  删除换行1 take biopsy and handover the case to the vascular surgeons.

【77】CLINICAL FEATURES.—
It is an enlargement of the subhyoid bursa with  删除换行1 accumulation of inflammatory fluid within it. So it may be  删除换行1 called subhyoid bursitis. The subhyoid bursa is situated below  删除换行1 the hyoid bone and in front of the thyrohyoid membrane.

【78】Diagnosis.— (i) Pain with swelling just below the hyoid  删除换行1 bone in the midline is the characteristic feature of this  删除换行1 condition.

【79】(ii) The swelling is oval with long axis placed  删除换行1 transversally parallel to the hyoid bone (cf. thyroglossal cyst).

【80】(iii) As mentioned earlier it is also a midline swelling,  删除换行1 which moves up with deglutition as it is attached to the hyoid  删除换行1 bone. But it does not move with protrusion of the tongue.

【81】(iv) It is a cystic swelling, so fluctuation test is positive.
Transillumination test is negative as the fluid, it contains, is  删除换行1 turbid and not clear.

【82】Treatment.—- Complete excision of the cyst by making a  删除换行1 transverse incision along the Langer's line over the cyst is  删除换行1 the only treatment.

【83】THE SWELLINGS, WHICH MOVE UP

【84】WITH DEGLUTITION, ARE:

【85】1. Thyroid swellings.

【86】2. Ectopic thyroid.

【87】3. Thyroglossal cyst. '

【88】4. Subhyoid bursal cyst or subhyoid bursitis.

【89】5. Enlarged pretracheal lymph nodes which are fixed  删除换行1 to the trachea.

【90】6. Laryngocele.

【91】Only thyroglossal cyst moves up also with protrusion of the 删除换行1 tongue.黄艳玲

====================================================================================================
