【0】My patient is suffering from multiple metabolic syndrome and arte-rial hypertension with a major cardiovascular risk； her file records excessive diurnal somnolence， and her nocturnal sleep is interrupted by waking several times with a severe apnoea syndrome. She has been undergoing the menopause for two years. The arterial hypertension began when she was only twenty-eight years old， whereas the multiple metabolic syndrome is recent (slightly more than two years). She has been a heavy smoker in the past， stopping three years ago； she suffers 删除换行1 from epicondylitis and tendinitis in her upper limbs-symptoms that are connected with her professional activity. The androgenically-distributed weight has been showing some improvement for a year， and the doctors attribute this excess weight to a problem in eating behaviour rather than any metabolic deficiency or a side-effect of any medication.

【1】I will digress here slightly concerning metabolic syndrome 删除10：<u>(Giral &Cuzin， 2003； Hansel， 2007)</u>. Metabolic syndrome is diagnosed when three of the following criteria are met：

【2】●a measurable increase in the waistline

【3】●an increase in the arterial pressure (over 130/85mmHg) 删除换行1 a fasting glycaemia higher than 1g/1

【4】●an increase in triglycerides (over 1.5g/l) 删除换行1 a reduction in "good"(HDL) cholesterol (less than 0.5g/l in men and0.4g/l in women).

【5】Abdominal obesity is indicated by an accumulation of visceral fat， which increases the risk of cardiovascular and metabolic disease. The doctor has to measure his patients' waistlines systematically： 102cm for men and 88cm for women. A waistline measuring over 88cm is found in 11.6 per cent of women aged forty-five to fifty years， 14.3 per cent of women aged fifty to fifty-five years， and 20.2 per cent of those aged over fifty-five years. This excess visceral adipose fat causes various abnormalities， such as type 2 diabetes， arterial hypertension， or dys-lipidaemia. Epidemiological studies have shown an increase in the relative risk of cardiovascular mortality， myocardial infarction， and general mortality in patients with an enlarged waistline.

【6】It is also important to know that even a slight reduction in weight brings a significant reduction in the risks associated with abdominal obesity. Dietary recommendations are important in this respect， and it is preferable to manage with a modest calorific reduction in conjunction with what I often recommend， which is a change in eating behaviour， rather than a diet that the patient would be content with following for a shorter or longer period.

【7】I often tell my students and patients that weight loss can only be established over longer periods than those envisaged by my medical colleagues； I am thinking of three- to five-year periods necessary for losing five to ten kilos in order to consolidate， over ten years in total， an ideal weight adapted to the patient's new eating behaviours. The 删除换行1 time that I indicate observes much more closely the body's adaptation to new ways of eating. Excessively fast weight loss constitutes an attack for the body， and the central nervous system， as the main agent that controls eating behaviours， not understanding what is suddenly hap-pening， does everything it can to store what are assumed to be the nec-essary calories to ensure the survival of the body that it is controlling. The central nervous system precisely calculates weight based on cur-rent data； it is these data that have to be changed. According to my clinical experience， the central nervous system has very long periodsof adaptation， and the of2weight loss has to be achieved in a similar way to going down a staircase stopping at each step. Observing such a pro-cedure allows the brain to encode the weight reduction gradually and to maintain the weight that the patient wishes to reach. It is important to understand that this requires an alliance between the patient’s ego and the central “management"organ of the body-the central nerv-ous system (or CNS)； knowing your body well is the best strategy. The benefits of physical exercise have been abundantly demonstrated， and must accompany the changes in eating behaviour.

【8】Marie-Laure's psychosomatic risk

【9】Marie-Laure has returned to some physical activity； she is being treated by a physiotherapist and the doctors emphasise that this is a patient with a good observance of medical advice.

【10】How does a psychosomatician analyse the data presented above? We first have to ascertain the latency periods between life events and the emergence of somatic symptoms； the arterial hypertension that has become resistant over time emerged soon after her first daughter was born and， according to my hypothesis， was considerably reinforced by the conflict with her husband， which ended in a divorce three years after the symptom appeared， combined with continuous work-related stress over a twenty-year period. No doctor can overlook the conse-quences of life events on the general equilibrium； to these two events， we must add the patient's incapacity to mourn even her conflictual rela-tionships. I must note here the existence of a masochistic component that enabled her to tolerate difficult situations for lengthy periods.
Having reached the age of fifty， two years before I examined her， our patient became menopausal， which constitutes a challenge to be over-come； she has to adapt psychically to a new， altered state of her body.

【11】This period is very often accompanied by depression， and my medical colleagues emphasise the patient's depressed state， for which her psychiatrist had prescribed an antidepressant. The menopause is often accompanied by changes in the body image that represent an ordeal for women. As will be seen later， in another case presentation relating to organ transplants， we are dealing with two changes： a change in the neuronal body image and a change in the psychic body image.

【12】The patient also has difficulties adapting to changes in her life situ-ations， especially in her body； she is deeply regressed and psychically fixed in an "oral" position， since oral satisfactions (food， cigarettes， etc.) are the favoured formulas of her equilibrium. The results are visible， since she has put on forty kilos in twenty years and her current body-mass index (BMI) is 31.5， that is to say obese (from 30 to 35). The patient's resources are limited， since physical activities are only recent and still very infrequent； there are no leisure activities， friendly relationships are restricted to rare annual meetings， and there is no love relationship. We note that the “zone" of satisfaction in life is very limited. This state can only cause us concern for the future， especially given that if the psychia-trist does not manage to instigate the mourning process， the patient will be in danger when she takes her retirement， and， of course， when her second daughter leaves home. The future looks bleak if we follow a sce-nario of the patient's progressive disorganisation caused by her retire-ment and the incapacity to redeploy her energy in projects that might support the life drives. My report on the consultation could therefore contain some pessimistic comments.

【13】But we can also envisage a second scenario by considering the fol-lowing positive elements： presence of a narcissistic core (self-love) that allows the patient to continue to take care of herself， as shown by her physical appearance at the time of the consultation； the presence of a masochistic core that enables her to tolerate painful ordeals； and finally the presence of a capacity to observe medical guidance. This is a crucial factor in medicine and psychosomatics， because the doctors know (and there are statistics to prove it) that the proportion of patients follow-ing medical recommendations is increasingly low， hence the questions often raised about the efficacy of medicine. A patient who follows the prescriptions is therefore favourably viewed by the medical staff， who form the hypothesis that the somatic risk is consequently lower.

【14】Another factor in the patient’s favour is the relationship of trust that she maintains with “good mother figures"； this relationship with 删除换行1 external objects， such as the nurses， doctors， psychosomaticians， and so on enables her to lead her life. The nurses have noted this behaviour， as they have written in their logbook： “good observance， the stay in hospital has restored her spirits a little". I often tell my students that， for some patients， the hospital is a good mother， and that is borne out in Marie-Laure's case. The nurses’ logbook should never be overlooked when considering patients.

【15】The importance of a favourable environment that is conducive to improving health can therefore be noted； my therapeutic recommenda-tions will be made according to the hypothesis of a favourable environ-ment. If， in her psychotherapy， Marie-Laure manages to strengthen her capacities to invest her vital energy in new activities， such as friends， leisure pastimes， and physical activities， we can then take a more opti-mistic view of her future at a seven-year horizon. We cannot predict the accidents of life， but if the therapy does not achieve its objective—if Marie-Laure cannot confront the separation from her daughter and her work when she retires-we will be confronted with a severe problem of probable somatic disorganisations： cardiovascular risk and arterial hypertension.

【16】Where the medical and psychosomatic predictions converge and diverge

【17】The current medical approach is essentially based on analysing the biological factors and the patient’s medical history； the integrative psychosomatic examination， as I have developed it， considers the state of psychic functioning and its relation to somatic and psychic incidents in the patient’s history. To this， I add the effect of the mal-functioning of the mental apparatus on the neurological and entire biological system. This approach concerns all somatic pathologies， and in this respect I agree with my friend and colleague Christophe Dejours's observation that there are no psychosomatic illnesses or psychosomatic patients.

【18】I am putting forward the hypothesis that the psychic apparatus participates to a greater or lesser degree in all somatic pathologies. If we take the medical approach， we note that Marie-Laure is in serious danger of cardiovascular risk in the long-term； if we add the psychoso-matic analysis we can understand that the cardiovascular risk can be greatly reduced by reintroducing Marie-Laure's capacity to change her 删除换行1 behaviour. Adding in the psychosomatic analysis means that we are reintroducing the dimension of the subject to medical practice.

【19】The stability of psychic functioning is initially assessed on the basis of a person's relationship with his first love object—the mother， or mater-nal substitute. All research in psychoanalysis and the neurosciences emphasises the importance， in the first case， of psychic programming， and in the second， of neuronal programming in the earliest years of life. For human beings， and mammals in general， these two forms of programming occur through the relationship to the mother， who her-self exists in a relationship to the father， who is himself integrated into a wider environment. Psychoanalysts refer to the "introjection of the object"， confirming that the first stage of human psychosexual devel-opment has been completed (for Klein， at around nine months， in the ninth-month depression that signals this internalisation).

【20】The unconscious perception of my relationship with Marie-Laure evolved throughout the interview； sitting opposite me was a woman of about fifty years， who seemed to want to talk. Then， her constant quest for approval led me to wonder about the new image that she was communicating to me； the pathological mournings gradually returned to what Klein terms the ninth-month depression， indicat-ing that the child has introjected the maternal object， making him capable of coping with the mother’s absence. The object seemed to me to be unstable； I perceived a fragile being in distress， and I still sensed in her the emotion connected with this demand for presence. The breakdown of the relationship with her mother led me to con-sider the hypothesis that， although she had separated from her mother， she had developed a strategy for moving as close as possible to her“good object" choices and protecting herself against the "bad object"by separations (e.g.， from her mother) or from her managers at work by means of somatic problems. She was therefore in the position of splitting the good and the bad object： her mother was the bad object that she kept at a distance in time， and the doctors， medical staff， her husband， daughters， and so on were good objects with whom she could maintain relations because they allowed her to reduce the men-tal excitations connected with the stress of her life. I suppose that her superiors belonged to the bad objects. At the end of the interview， the image I had deep inside of me was of a fragile little girl who had been left on her own. One really wanted to help her， and the nurses were right about this in their comments.

【21】14 A NEW BODY-MINDAPPROACH

【22】On the theoretical level of integrative psychosomatics it can be noted that the psychic apparatus has not been able to provide an equilibrium to the patient at a very early stage， and that， through her oral libidinal fixations， the hypothalamic component3 of the central nervous system has provided the general equilibrium in conjunction with the psyche. We are confronted with interrelations between two systems that can provide a state of equilibrium in the psychosomatic unity； this is what I called the dual-control model， before establishing the model of the five systems.

【23】The psychosomatic clinical examination form

【24】Once the clinical examination has been conducted， it is advisable to complete the form (below) that I have developed from a new grid of the characteristics of somatic patients' functioning and a new nosography； this document considerably facilitates the communication between doctors and psychosomaticians， and enables us to assess the patient’s psychosomatic risk.

【25】Concerning the creation and scientific development of this method-ological tool， entitled： “Method for assessing and diagnosing psycho-somatic health； the general assessment of psychosomatic risk"， I have written the following brief introduction.

【26】This psychosomatic diagnostic tool was developed from my research into professional stress undertaken from 1980； this has been the subject of many publications in France and worldwide， in par-ticular with Prof Cary Cooper of Manchester University and with a group of researchers from twenty-four countries. In 1984， I joined Pierre Marty at the Institute of Psychosomatics， which he founded in1978， and I undertook some research with him from 1987 on the psy-chosomatic classification that he had developed. I published some of our research findings jointly with him， and after his death I continued to apply this classification， leading to two publications in psychiatric journals 删除10：<u>(Stora， 1994，1995)</u>.

【27】Applying this classification led me to conclude that the Marty clas-sification was incomplete and could not be used in its current form by doctors and psychologists if it was to be turned into a tool of psycho-somatic diagnosis and a method of epidemiological research. Pierre Marty possessed considerable clinical experience that he had not yet integrated into his classification.

【28】I used many North American classifications for my research， and finally I formulated the present-day method， of which I have used a first outline to assess the greater or lesser risk of rejection in heart transplant patients. My publication now forms a chapter of the book on cardiology published by the heart transplant department at La Pitie-Salpetriere 删除10：<u>(Gandjbakhch et al.， 2000)</u>.

【29】This method makes it possible to form a diagnosis and a strategy for psychotherapeutic treatment， as well as epidemiological studies in integrative psychosomatics. It is over a year ago that I undertook an investigation into breast cancer with Dr Pascale Surugue and col-leagues from the Institut Curie， with a view to validating the method that I have developed.

【30】I know that psychoanalysts are opposed to such investigations， but， in Pierre Marty's lifetime and subsequently， our publications have proved that it is possible. Epidemiological research does not have ther-apeutic objectives， but sets out to compare structures of psychic and psychosomatic functioning in a way that allows patients’ points of vulnerability to be ascertained in order to assess their psychosomatic functioning and consequently their risk factors in psychic and somatic dimensions. I introduced the concept of risk to meet the concerns of the doctors with whom I work at La Pitie-Salpetriere.

【31】Every observed patient (anamnesis) must first be resituated in the three dimensions to which the human being belongs， according to the bio-psycho-social model developed in Boston by Professor Engel.

【32】I also refer to：

【33】1\. The model of the psychic apparatus in Freud’s metapsychology，and his first and second topography， articulated according to Marty's theoretical proposition from the integration of the second phase of the anal stage. I also adopt Freud’s theory of the drives， emphasis-ing the process of fusion and de-fusion (I particularly emphasise the second theory of the drives， life drives， death drives).

【34】2\. For a more detailed study of the stages of pregenital development， the models of Klein， Meltzer， Winnicott， Bion， Joyce McDougall， E. Kestenberg.

【35】3\. For narcissism， mainly Kohut's contributions (the grandiose self and Ego Ideal)， as well as Grunberger and Green.

【36】4\. For masochism， Freud'scontributionsand， more recently， Rosenberg's important work.

【37】16 A NEW BODY-MINDAPPROACH

【38】As an example， here is the form for Marie-Laure.

【39】RESULTS OF THE PSYCHOSOMATIC CLINICAL EXAMINATION JBS-PSYSOMA-21 October 2010 version THE PSYCHOSOMATIC GRID Developed by J. B. STORA from 1993 to 2011.

【40】Surname \[Omittedl

【41】Forename Marie-Laure

【42】Date of birth Fifty-three years old黄艳玲

====================================================================================================
