【0】EPIGASTRIC HERNIA

【1】It is an extremely rare condition. It means hernia occurs  删除换行1 through the obturator foramen traversed by the obturator  删除换行1 vessels and nerve. This obturator foramen is wider in  删除换行1 females and that is why it is about 6 times commoner in  删除换行1 women.

【2】Clinical features.— Most of the patients are old  删除换行1 women above 60 years of age who have lost considerable  删除换行1 fat.

【3】The condition is difficult to diagnose, since the swelling  删除换行1 is covered by the pectineus and no definite swelling can  删除换行1 be seen even in the Scarpa’s triangle. The hernia becomes  删除换行1 only apparent when the limb is flexed, abducted and  删除换行1 rotated outwards. The patient usually keeps the limb in  删除换行1 the semiflexed position and movements increase pain.

【4】Obturator hernia often gets strangulated as it comes  删除换行1 out through an opening surrounded by osseoaponeurosis.
In about V2 the cases of strangulation, pain is referred  删除换行1 along the obturator nerve to the knee joint of the  删除换行1 corresponding side by its articulate branch.

【5】Only rectal or vaginal examination can detect the  删除换行1 tender swelling in the region of the obturator foramen.

【6】Richter’s hernia is quite common.

【7】Treatment.-— Operation should always be performed  删除换行1 as strangulation is very common.

【8】Abdominal approach is usually preferred by lower  删除换行1 paramedian incision as the condition is often discovered  删除换行1 only after laparotomy which has been performed for  删除换行1 intestinal obstruction. The obturator foramen is widened  删除换行1 and the hernia is pulled in after the abdomen has been  删除换行1 properly mopped to prevent contamination from the toxic  删除换行1 fluid of the hernial sac. The obturator vessels are always  删除换行1 vulnerable of being injured. If the hernia cannot be  删除换行1 released from the abdomen or the diagnosis has been made  删除换行1 before operation, the femoral approach may be employed.

【9】Femoral approach.— A vertical incision is made  删除换行1 extending downwards from the inguinal ligament 2 cm  删除换行1 medial to the femoral vessels. The adductor longus is  删除换行1 retracted medially. The pectineus muscle is separated or  删除换行1 divided to expose the obturator externus. The hernial sac 删除换行1 is usually found lying on the surface of this muscle having  删除换行1 emerged along its superior border. The sac and the  删除换行1 contents are dealt with in the similar manner as  删除换行1 strangulated hernia and herniorrhaphy is performed by  删除换行1 repairing the gap in the obturator foramen.

【10】INCISIONAL HERNIA

【11】This hernia extrudes out through  删除换行1 the greater sciatic foramen either above or below the  删除换行1 piriformis muscle.

【12】This hernia occurs through the lesser  删除换行1 sciatic foramen. In the differential diagnosis of gluteal  删除换行1 and sciatic herniae one should remember (i) a cold abscess, 删除换行1 (ii) a lipoma, (iii) a gluteal aneurysm, (iv) fibrosarcoma  删除换行1 beneath the gluteus maximus.

【13】It is a type of interparietal hernia  删除换行1 occurring at the level of the arcuate line just lateral to  删除换行1 the rectus muscle.

【14】The extraperitoneal fat alongwith the hernial sac lies  删除换行1 just deep to the internal oblique muscle or may advance  删除换行1 to reach the gap between the external and internal oblique  删除换行1 muscles. Only a slight swelling can be detected.

【15】Treatment.— Operation is the treatment. Incision is  删除换行1 made on the swelling just lateral to the rectus muscle.
After incising skin and subcutaneous tissue, external  删除换行1 aponeurosis is split to expose the hernial sac. The sac is  删除换行1 isolated, the contents are reduced. The sac is ligated and  删除换行1 excised. The transversus and oblique muscles are repaired.

【16】In this case hernia occurs through  删除换行1 the pelvic floor. It is extremely rare and occasionally seen  删除换行1 in —

【17】(i) Postoperative hernia through the perineal scar  删除换行1 following excision of rectum.

【18】(ii) Pudendal hernia when the hernia occurs as a  删除换行1 swelling of the labium majus.

【19】(iii) Ischiorectal hernia, in which the hernia passes  删除换行1 through the levator ani or through hiatus of Schwalbe  删除换行1 into the ischiorectal fossa.CHAPTER

【20】TESTIS, EPIDIDYMIS

【21】AND SCROTUM 18

【22】CLINICAL FEATURES.—
Testis develops in the lumbar region from the  删除换行1 thickened epithelium on the medial side of the  删除换行1 mesonephric ridge in the 5th week. This thickened  删除换行1 epithelium continues to proliferate displacing the  删除换行1 mesonephros in a dorsilateral direction and forming a  删除换行1 projection into the coelomic cavity, which is termed the  删除换行1 genital ridge. Upto the 7th week the genital gland  删除换行1 possesses no differentiating feature. The proliferating  删除换行1 epithelium on the surface sends a number of cellular cords  删除换行1 inwards which are known as testis cords. At the 7th week a  删除换行1 mesenchyme cuts off the testis cord from the surface and  删除换行1 forms the tunica albuginea. At this stage one can  删除换行1 differentiate between testis (where tunica albuginea is  删除换行1 prominently present) and ovary (where tunica albuginea  删除换行1 is absent). The testis cords encroach on the medulla where  删除换行1 they unite with the network derived from the  删除换行1 mesenchyme and becomes rete testis. The premordial germ  删除换行1 cells are incorporated in the cords (testis cords), which  删除换行1 later become enlarged and canalised to form the  删除换行1 seminiferous tubules. The cells derived from the surface of  删除换行1 the gonad form the supporting cells of Sertoli. The  删除换行1 interstitial cells of the testis are derived from the  删除换行1 mesenchyme which do not become incorporated into the  删除换行1 tubules. The cords of the rete testis canalise at a later  删除换行1 stage and become connected to the mesonephric duct by  删除换行1 5 to 12 most cephalic of the persisting tubules and these  删除换行1 become exceedingly convoluted and form the lobules of 删除换行1 the head of the epididymis. The mesonephric duct becomes  删除换行1 the canal of the epididymis and the ductus deferens of the 删除换行1 testis.

【23】DESCENT OF THE TESTIS.— At first, the testis lies  删除换行1 on the dorsum of the abdominal wall. Mesenchymal cells  删除换行1 form a cord which extends from that part of the skin  删除换行1 which later forms the scrotum, through the inguinal fold  删除换行1 to the lower pole of the testis. This cord later becomes a  删除换行1 fibromuscular bundle and is termed the gubernaculum 删除换行1 testis. It traverses the site of the future inguinal canal,  删除换行1 which is formed around it by the muscles of the  删除换行1 abdominal wall as they become differentiated. The testis  删除换行1 descends along the path of the gubernaculum whether or  删除换行1 not due to pull of it. A fold of peritoneum protrudes 删除换行1 down the inguinal canal along with the testis forming  删除换行1 the processus vaginalis. The lower pole of the testis is kept  删除换行1 in apposition with the deep inguinal ring by the  删除换行1 gubernaculum until the 7th month. Suddenly the testis  删除换行1 passes through the inguinal canal and gains the scrotum.
As it descends, it is necessarily accompanied by its  删除换行1 peritoneal covering and by a fold of peritoneum from the  删除换行1 adjoining peritoneum from the iliac fossa which is drawn  删除换行1 down as the processus vaginalis as also its blood vessels  删除换行1 and nerve supply. The peritoneal covering of the testis  删除换行1 which represents the distal end of the processus vaginalis  删除换行1 and into which the testis projects, is termed the tunica 删除换行1 vaginalis testis. The part of the processus vaginalis which  删除换行1 is associated with the spermatic cord in the inguinal canal  删除换行1 normally becomes obliterated. The fascial covering of the  删除换行1 testis and spermatic cord including the Cremaster are  删除换行1 developed from the surrounding structures as the testis  删除换行1 descends.

【24】Time-table of testicular descent.—

【25】In the lumbar region in the 2nd month of foetal life.

【26】In the iliac fossa — 3rd month of foetal life.

【27】At the deep inguinal ring — till the 7th month.

【28】Travels the inguinal canal — in the 7th month.

【29】At the superficial inguinal ring — at the later part of  删除换行1 the 7th month or 8th month.

【30】Scrotum (its final position) — testis enters the scrotum  删除换行1 in the 9th month.

【31】Factors which cause descent of testis.—

【32】(i) Shortening and active contraction of the  删除换行1 gubernaculum.

【33】(ii) Increased intra-abdominal pressure.

【34】(iii) Active contraction of the lower fibres of the internal oblique muscles which squeezes the testis through  删除换行1 the canal.

【35】(iv) Higher temperature of the abdominal cavity,  删除换行1 which is detrimental to spermatogenesis.

【36】(v) Hormone, specially Chorionic gonadotrophin  删除换行1 from the maternal circulation helps descent of the testis.

【37】Causes of undescended testis.—

【38】(i) Abnormality of the gubernaculum testis.— 

【39】Gubernaculum plays a major role in descent of testis and  删除换行1 abnormality of this structure may result in undescended 删除换行1 testis.

【40】(ii) Intrinsic testicular defect.— The testis may be 删除换行1 insensitive to gonadotrophins and may not act to it. This  删除换行1 may lead to undescended testis.

【41】(iii) Deficient 删除换行1 gonadotrophic hormonal 删除换行1 stimulation.— Lack of  删除换行1 adequate maternal  删除换行1 gonadotrophins may  删除换行1 be a cause of incomplete  删除换行1 descent.

【42】(iv) Obstruction  删除换行1 due to adhesions of the  删除换行1 testis.

【43】(v) Short vas  删除换行1 deferens.

【44】(vi) Short testicular vessels or  删除换行1 pampiniform plexus.

【45】3rd Month

【46】Beginning;  删除换行1 of 7th Month!

【47】7 th Month, 删除换行1 8 th Month 删除换行1 9 th Month

【48】©-2nd Month 删除换行4 (vii) Imperfectly developed testis interferes with its  删除换行1 own descent.
删除3：<u>Fig.18.1.— Shows the time-table of  删除换行1 testicular descent. See the text.</u>
HISTORY.—
An undescended testis is one which has failed to  删除换行1 descend to the scrotum and is retained at any point along  删除换行1 the normal path of its descent. About 30% of premature  删除换行1 male babies have undescended testes. For full term infants,  删除换行1 the incidence is 4%. Spontaneous descent occurs in most  删除换行1 of these by 1 year of age, when the incidence of  删除换行1 undescended testis is 0.8%.

【49】Undescended testis is more common on the right side  删除换行1 (50%). It is less common on the left side (30%). In about  删除换行1 20% cases it is bilateral. When both the testes are absent  删除换行1 in the scrotum, the condition is called cryptorchidism 删除换行1 (Hidden testes).

【50】Cryptorchidism.— This term is derived from the 

【51】Greek word ‘cryptos’, which means hidden.When both  删除换行1 testes are impalpable the condition is known as  删除换行1 cryptorchidism or hidden testes. As the right testis descends  删除换行1 later than the left testis, undescended testis is more  删除换行1 common on the right side.

【52】Anorchism.— Complete agenesis of testis is known as  删除换行1 anorchism. One testis may fail to develop occsionally in  删除换行1 association with ipsilateral agenesis of kidney and ureter.
This is known as monorchism and is seen more often on  删除换行1 the right side and is termed 'right-sided syndrome’. There  删除换行1 are cases who exhibit no evidence of viable testicular tissue,  删除换行1 though the external genitalia are fully differentiated in  删除换行1 masculine configuration. Such persons are apparently  删除换行1 normal males, though with a completely empty scrotum.
Puberty is delayed and incomplete with inadequate  删除换行1 plasma testosterone levels and with persistent elevation 删除换行1 of gonadotrophin levels. It is postulated that such persons  删除换行1 with complete anorchism did have normal testes at early  删除换行1 stage of gestation, but sometime after the 16th week of  删除换行1 foetal life the testes atrophied possibly due to mechanical  删除换行1 torsion or interference with testicular blood supply in  删除换行1 the course of descent. A gratifying therapeutic response  删除换行1 to continuing exogenous testosterone therapy will be  删除换行1 observed with sexual maturity, increased libido, masculine  删除换行1 distribution of body fat and muscle mass.

【53】(i) Growth of the testis.— It is clear now that scrotal  删除换行1 temperture is at least 1°C cooler than the abdominal  删除换行1 temperature, Proper development of spermatogenic  删除换行1 tubules cannot take place in abdominal cavity. As a result  删除换行1 the spermatogenic tubules are of diminished size and  删除换行1 fewer spermatogonia have been detected in undescended  删除换行1 testis in boys at about 6 years of age.

【54】Histologically the epithelial elements are grossly  删除换行1 immature and by the age of 16 years irreversible  删除换行1 destructive changes have occurred which halt  删除换行1 spermatogenesis and limit the production of androgens  删除换行1 to around half of the normal output.

【55】After 6 years of age, changes become more obvious.
The diameter of the tubules is smaller than normal. The  删除换行1 number of spermatogonia decreases. Fibrosis is noticed  删除换行1 between the tubules.

【56】After puberty, the difference is obvious and the  删除换行1 undescended testis is much smaller and flabby than the  删除换行1 normal intrascrotal testis. The undescended testis is hardly  删除换行1 more than 1/2 the size of its intrascrotal counterpart.

【57】(ii) Internal secretory function.—- Fortunately the 

【58】Leydig cells are not affected by body temperature and  删除换行1 are therefore usually found in normal numbers in  删除换行1 undescended testis. So secondary sex characters appear  删除换行1 and endocrinologic cause of impotence is rare in this  删除换行1 group. However in bilateral cryptorchidism, androgen  删除换行1 level is diminished to certain extent.

【59】(iii) Epididymis remains separated from the testis with  删除换行1 a long mesorchium, which is the primitive mesogenitale  删除换行1 which connects the genital fold to the mesonephros. So  删除换行1 torsion of testis is more common in these cases.

【60】(iv) Sometimes an undescended testis is associated  删除换行1 with a hernial sac. In a series about 90% of cases of  删除换行1 undescended testes were associated with patent processus  删除换行1 vaginalis.

【61】(v) Undescended testis may be associated with other  删除换行1 urinary tract abnormalities.

【62】(vi) Chance of malignancy is more in undescended  删除换行1 testis. The chance is more if the undescended testis  删除换行1 presents in a patient of 10 years of age or older and many  删除换行1 surgeons recommend orchidectomy for unilateral  删除换行1 undescended testis at this age group rather than 删除换行1 orchidopexy.

【63】Types of undescended testis.—

【64】(a) Intra-abdominal.— The testis remains  删除换行1 extraperitoneally or retroperitoneally deep within the  删除换行1 pelvis or just above the deep inguinal ring or it may even  删除换行1 be located anywhere within the lower abdomen.

【65】(b) Inguinal.— The testis is in the inguinal canal. The  删除换行1 testis may or may not be palpable.

【66】(c) In the superficial inguinal pouch the testis frequently  删除换行1 comes to rest just outside the superficial inguinal ring in  删除换行1 the superficial fascia. This testis must be differentiated  删除换行1 from the much more common retractile testis, which also  删除换行1 lies often in the same position.

【67】(d) lumbar testis.— Complete failure of descent and  删除换行1 the testis remains where it was developed.

【68】(e) Iliac testis.— Testis is just deep to the deep inguinal  删除换行1 ring.

【69】(f) At the superficial inguinal ring.— The testis  删除换行1 frequently comes to rest just outside the external inguinal  删除换行1 ring.

【70】(g) Scrotal testis.— The testis lies in the upper part of  删除换行1 the scrotum. It is often a retractile testis due to contraction of overactive cremaster muscle. In this case the scrotal sac is of normal size. The testis is also of normal size.
The testis can also be brought down to the scrotum.

【71】ON EXAMINATION.—

【72】Age.— Undescended testes are usually noticed in  删除换行1 children, but are occasionally not noticed until  删除换行1 adolescence or even adult life.

【73】TREATMENT.—

【74】(i) Obviously absence of one or both testes from the  删除换行1 scrotum is the commonest presenting symptom. In fact  删除换行1 the child or the parent first notices that the scrotum is not 删除换行1 developed, rather than absence of testis within it.

【75】(ii) Occasionally patients present in adult life with  删除换行1 infertility, though secondary sex characteristics, are usually  删除换行1 normal.

【76】(iii) In a small proportion of cases patients present  删除换行1 with indirect inguinal hernia i.e. a swelling in the groin,  删除换行1 along with undescended testis.苏锦恭

====================================================================================================
