【0】Case Files®: Medical Ethics and Professionalism    

【1】CASE 29
-------

【2】A 32-year-old woman slips and falls from a 10-foot ladder at work. Her coworkers find her awake and attempting to mouth words, but she is not capable of moving her limbs, and she is barely breathing. When paramedics arrive, she is unconscious and still barely breathing, so they intubate her. At the hospital, she opens her eyes spontaneously and appears to attend when spoken to. She can blink when asked but she cannot move her limbs. She appears to have no sensation below the neck. She is on ventilator support but is generating no spontaneous respiratory movements. When asked about pain, she indicates using blinks and facial gestures that her neck is very painful.

【3】She is then medically sedated in order to obtain imaging studies. Computed tomography (CT) of the cervical spine reveals a burst fracture of the atlas, with bony fragments and soft tissue within the spinal canal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reveals severe edema of the upper cord from the level of the first cervical vertebra to the third. She is admitted to the surgical intensive care unit (ICU). Because she is sedated, the ICU attending and neurosurgeon approach the patient’s husband and parents. The neurosurgeon indicates that the patient is very likely to be permanently quadriplegic and dependent on ventilator support. She recommends surgery as soon as possible to stabilize the upper spine to minimize pain and maximize the likelihood of some neurologic recovery.

【4】To the physicians’ surprise, the patient’s husband and her parents unanimously refuse surgery. Moreover, they explain that they are certain that the patient would refuse all life-sustaining therapy (LST). The patient’s husband has durable power of attorney for health care, also sometimes called a health care proxy, for his wife, and specifically requests that ventilator support be stopped and that she be allowed to die. The husband and parents all indicate that they have had prior discussions about spinal cord injury and disability with the patient, and that she has specifically stated that she “would rather be dead than \[quadriplegic\].” When the surgeon suggests waking the patient and discussing the matter with her, the family refuse, claiming that, “We know what she would want, and we’re not going to put her through that. She would definitely not want to go through the trauma of finding out about her condition.”

【5】 Can the patient’s family, acting as the patient’s surrogates, refuse LST on her behalf, knowing that she will die as a result?

【6】 If the patient were awake and refusing LST for herself, should her clinicians stop it, knowing that she will die as a result?

【7】### ANSWERS TO CASE 29:

【8】#### Withholding Life Support

【9】Summary : A young woman experiences a high cervical spinal cord injury and is quadriplegic and ventilator-dependent. She is extremely unlikely to ever regain motor independence or breathe without the ventilator. At the moment she is sedated for acute evaluation of her injuries, but we know of no reason she would lack decision-making capacity if she were awoken. Her husband and her parents state that she 通用删除7(英):<u>(1)</u> would not want to be kept alive in such a state, and 通用删除7(英):<u>(2)</u> would not want to be woken up to be informed of her situation or make decisions for herself.

【10】 Can the patient’s family refuse LST? Although it is usually the case that surrogates can refuse LST on behalf of an incapacitated patient, there are 2 strong arguments against honoring their request to stop her ventilator. The first is that this patient only lacks decision-making capacity because she is being medically sedated. Because she is able to make decisions for herself (at least as far as the clinicians and family know), then generally speaking, she should be consulted about decisions that will have major and irreversible impact on her life. The second is an argument that decisions to withdraw LST in the first hours, days, or weeks after a high cervical cord injury should be postponed.

【11】 If the patient were awake and refusing LST for herself, should her clinicians withhold LST? Many experts in neurology and rehabilitation medicine argue that decisions to forego LST after a high cervical cord injury resulting in quadriplegia should be postponed until 通用删除7(英):<u>(1)</u> some time has passed to allow the acute emotional and psychological trauma of the event to subside somewhat, and 通用删除7(英):<u>(2)</u> the patient has had a chance to learn more about what their quality of life will be like in his or her new debilitated state. This amounts to denying the request of a patient who meets our usual standards for competence, which cannot be done indefinitely without unacceptably infringing her right to self-determination. Most commentators on this issue recommend a period of 6 months or more in a rehabilitation program before clinicians honor a request to stop LST.

【12】### ANALYSIS

【13】##### Objectives

【14】1\. Recognize the settings in which decisions should be made by patients and distinguish from settings in which surrogate decision-making is appropriate.

【15】2\. Understand the arguments for and against honoring a request to forego LST in the acute time period after a high cervical cord injury.

【16】##### Considerations

【17】When approaching a difficult case one should try to identify the decision-making standards that should be used. Is this a case of a competent patient who should decide for herself? It would seem so in this case, but this requires recognizing that the sedated patient is capable of decision-making. If the patient has lost decision-making capacity, has she made any advance directives that apply to the situation? Has she designated someone as the best surrogate?

【18】One must also identify the range of ethically permissible courses that could be pursued. If it would not be ethically permissible to withdraw LST, then this should not be an option offered to the patient or her surrogates. If the patient or her surrogates ask to pursue an ethically impermissible course, then clinicians can and should resist the temptation to simply acquiesce. Clinicians should ask for help in the form of ethics and, in some cases, legal consultations.

【19】### APPROACH TO:

【20】#### Withholding Life Support

【21】### DEFINITIONS

【22】COMPETENCE : This is used interchangeably with decision-making capacity to refer to a patient’s ability to make medical decisions for himself or herself.

【23】LIFE-SUSTAINING THERAPY : This phrase is typically used to refer to mechanical ventilation and artificial hydration and nutrition. However, it can also be used to refer to any therapy that is currently needed to keep the patient alive (eg, pressors, antibiotics, dialysis).

【24】SUBSTITUTED JUDGMENT : The standard of decision-making wherein surrogates attempt to make the decision that the patient would have made, based on the surrogate’s knowledge of the patient’s values, preferences, and decision-making style.

【25】### CLINICAL APPROACH

【26】In a difficult case in which patients or surrogates are requesting to pursue a course of treatment that the clinicians think is ethically impermissible, it is usually best to continue talking rather than take an action that cannot be easily reversed. Obviously, in this case, removing the ventilator would very rapidly become irreversible. Alternatively, if the clinicians insist on continuing LST, and even on pursuing surgery for the spinal fracture, the patient will still have the option later to discontinue LST. Continuing LST and performing surgery over the objections of the patient or her surrogates could obviously be contentious and lead to conflict between the parties. Clinicians should anticipate this, by being prepared to patiently explain their actions, and by consulting with others who can help the patient and family understand why the usual practice of honoring the request of patients, surrogates, or both to forego LST is not being pursued. This might include social workers, patient–family relationship professionals, ethics consultants, and, if necessary, legal counsel.

【27】### DISCUSSION

【28】To decide on the most ethically defensible course of action in a difficult case, it is best to start by trying to identify the ethical principles at stake. By identifying the type of question we are facing, we make it much easier to identify the principles we should rely on when choosing a course of action. This also allows us to draw on experience from other cases sharing similar ethical features, and helps ensure that we reason consistently from case to case.

【29】At first glance, this case appears to be a case of deciding for others, in which family members or surrogates who know the patient have to make medical decisions on the patient’s behalf. If it is a case of deciding for others, then perhaps all we have to do is to ensure that the surrogates are well informed and are exercising substituted judgment (trying to make the decision they think the patient would have made, based on knowledge of the patient’s premorbid values and preferences). If those conditions are met, and the family agrees that the patient would not want LST, perhaps the most appropriate course is to cease ventilator support and allow the patient to die, while also ensuring to palliate any pain or suffering that might occur as a result.

【30】However, there are a number of problems with this approach. One very important problem is that the patient described here potentially has the cognitive capacity to make decisions for herself. As far as we can tell, the only reason she is unconscious right now is because she is being medically sedated. If she is only temporarily incapacitated, especially if we the clinicians are the ones incapacitating her, then we should not think of her as lacking decision-making capacity. If she can participate in important medical decisions, then generally speaking she ought participate in those discussions. This is all the more important when the decisions come with such stark and irreversible consequences.

【31】Perhaps, then, the clinicians should wake up the patient and discuss LST with her? If she wanted to continue LST, then she would need the cervical fusion, but the main topic of discussion would be about whether she wants to continue living, knowing that she is very likely (though it’s not absolutely certain) to remain a ventilator-dependent quadriplegic. Assuming she has capacity, discussing LST with her certainly seems like an important way to respect her autonomy as an individual. But, first we need to consider some important arguments against waking her up and letting her decide. One is the family’s argument that waking her up and discussing the situation with her would be horribly traumatic to the patient, and could only result in the same decision. Another is a more general point about when medical providers should allow patients, or surrogates on their behalf, to refuse LST after a sudden traumatic and life-altering event such as traumatic high cervical quadriplegia.

【32】In this case, the parents argue quite plausibly that, if the patient were to be awakened and learn of her situation, then she would be emotionally devastated. Furthermore, they say that they are absolutely certain that they know what her decision will be in the end. Regarding the decision to wake her up, they also claim that they know she would not want to be woken up to learn of her situation. So what purpose would be served by discussing it with her?

【33】In a sense, they are arguing that the decision to wake her up is a decision that can only be made by her surrogates. And, because they know the patient best, they should be allowed to exercise substituted judgment on her behalf regarding the question of whether to wake her up. This may well strike some readers as a plausible and perhaps even a persuasive argument. Other readers will probably disagree, believing that surrogates should only be permitted to make decisions for patients when they are incapacitated by their injury or their disease. (Though perhaps such a reader would allow an exception when surrogates make decisions that can later be reversed. For example, one might say that it is permissible for the surrogates to consent to the fusion surgery on behalf of the patient rather than wake her up, because the surgery does not commit her to indefinite LST, but it would not be permissible for the surrogates to refuse LST, because this is obviously an irreversible decision.)

【34】There are reasonable arguments on either side about what role the surrogates should play in making decisions for a patient like this one. So let us set this problem aside for a moment and consider the second problem: when, if ever, should we allow “competent” patients to refuse LST after a sudden and severely debilitating injury like traumatic high cervical quadriplegia? Imagine that the family consented to the cervical fusion. The surgery is performed without complication, and it is now 4 days after her fall. We wake her up. We manage (with some difficulty, of course) to establish reliable communication with her using communication boards with eye movements and lip-reading, and all are in agreement that she is fully awake and able to understand what is being said to her. Imagine that she is appropriately emotionally distraught, but able to pass any cognitive tests that anyone proposes, and she is able to understand her medical situation and prognosis, at least as it is conveyed to her by her care providers. Finally, imagine that she indicates that she wants the ventilator turned off. Should the attending physician immediately honor this patient’s competent refusal of LST?

【35】Generally speaking, physicians ought to honor competent patients’ informed voluntary refusal of any therapies, even life-sustaining therapies. For many, however, this type of case is the exception that proves the rule. Many but not all clinicians and ethicists argue that patients who suddenly lose their physical capabilities should not be permitted to refuse LST until 通用删除7(英):<u>(1)</u> a period of time has passed to allow the acute emotional upset to subside, and 通用删除7(英):<u>(2)</u> the patient has enough experience with her new disability to consider her perspective to be informed.

【36】This argument, it should be noted, is not an all-or-none argument. No mainstream ethicist would argue that competent and informed vent-dependent quadriplegics must be forced to continue living on a ventilator indefinitely . Rather, the argument is that some amount of time should pass, and some amount of information-exchange and learning should occur before a decision to discontinue LST. Most who take this position will recommend at least a few months before such a decision, and some argue that as long as 2 years are required before patients have sufficient emotional capacity and relevant information about life with their disability. It is well known that patients’ perception of quality of life gradually changes after a sudden disability, and it is also true that nondisabled persons systematically underestimate quality of life with disability when compared with disabled persons’ perceptions of their own quality of life.

【37】There appears to be a tension between the principle of beneficence on one hand and the principle of respect for autonomy on the other. Beneficence suggests that patients should be kept alive for a time because at least some of them will come to view life as a quadriplegic as acceptable and worth living. Respect for autonomy suggests that competent informed patients should not be subjected to medical interventions that they refuse. Early on in such a case, the principle of beneficence has strong persuasive power—should we at least give her a little time to think about her situation before withdrawing support? Later on, the principle of respect for autonomy gains more and more force: “You can’t keep me on LST against my wishes forever.”

【38】Whenever we draw a line (a few days, a few weeks, a few months, a few years), it will be arbitrary and will not fully resolve the tension between the principles. So now we see that there aren’t any clear lines we can draw that will ‘solve’ the case, but we can identify some guiding principles:

【39】1\. Potentially competent patients should be permitted to participate in important medical decisions for themselves, particularly when the decision being contemplated is irreversible and consequential.

【40】2\. Whenever possible in the immediate aftermath of a devastating injury, decisions to discontinue LST should only be made in a deliberate fashion, after the relevant parties have had time to adjust emotionally and learn more directly about what life will be like after the injury. Most ethicists and clinicians recommend a waiting period from a few months to a few years after a high cervical cord injury before discontinuing LST. Ideally, patients in this situation should be allowed to learn about rehabilitation, and should meet other survivors of high cervical quadriplegia.

【41】Both principles strongly suggest that the clinicians in this case should not simply honor the request of the family to turn off the ventilator within the first few days of the injury. Withdrawal of LST should only be seriously contemplated after the patient can be consulted, and only after an adjustment and information-exchange period has passed.

【42】These conclusions are not uncontroversial. Some readers may even disagree strongly. This is a perfect opportunity to point out the importance and utility of consultation with parties who might have differing perspectives on such a case. Ethics consultation services are particularly helpful. Legal counsel might reasonably be sought. Experts in rehabilitation can be very useful, as can psychiatrists and neurologists, social workers, therapists, and others. No matter what decision is reached, when the stakes are high and there are widely divergent opinions among the stakeholders, it is wise to be slow and deliberate, making use of wide consultation.

【43】###王磊

====================================================================================================
