【0】### Session 2

【1】In session 2, the therapist reviewed the self-monitoring log with Emily and completed a functional analysis 删除33：<u></u>. Emily noted that her focused picking most often occurred when she felt anxious, angry, or bored; in the morning before showering; and in the evening after getting home from work and during her bedtime preparations. In these situations, Emily reported that she would go to the bathroom and lean into the mirror, looking for “good spots” to pick. Picking targets most frequently included irregularities in the skin, including clogged pores, bumps, dried skin, and scars or scabs from previous picking episodes. Following most picking episodes, the therapist noted that Emily reported feeling not only “calmer” and “relieved” but also sometimes ashamed or annoyed with herself. The therapist drew a simple functional analysis diagram, showing that certain emotions (e.g. anxiety) and behaviors (e.g. leaning into the mirror) led to an increased urge to pick, which was then reduced by completing the picking. The therapist also noted that scabs and open lesions from picking episodes might increase Emily’s “touching” behavior and mirror checking, while the shame that resulted from picking increased her negative affect and might make her more vulnerable to future picking episodes.

【2】删除3：<u>Fig. 19.2

【3】Sample functional analysis</u>

【4】To increase Emily’s awareness of her picking behaviors, the therapist then assisted Emily in completing a more detailed, step-by-step chain analysis. Emily identified feeling stressed and anxious after a difficult day at work as a strong vulnerability factor. Contexts that increased the likelihood of picking included being home alone, feeling anxious or lonely, or noticing a “bump” on her skin (usually after face touching or inspection in the mirror). Other prompting events included automatically touching or picking the skin on her face, neck, arms, and chest. These contexts created a strong “urge” to pick. In response to this urge, Emily would go to the bathroom and closely examine her face in the mirror. Sometimes, she would disinfect the identified area with alcohol prior to picking. She then squeezed and picked her skin until she felt satisfied (often following the dislodging of sebum or pus) or until she “gave up” on an area, at which point she would search for a new target. Immediate, short-term consequences of picking were a mixture of feelings of relief, satisfaction, shame, and self-directed anger. Emily was also able to identify long-term negative consequences, including patches of dry skin (from harsh disinfectants), shame, anxiety, and increased use of heavy makeup. Emily agreed that these consequences likely perpetuated her picking. For homework, Emily was given another copy of the monitoring form and a chain analysis handout to complete at home.

【5】### Session 3

【6】In session 3, the therapist first reviewed the self-monitoring and chain analysis forms. In the remainder of the session, the therapist and Emily jointly identified stimulus control and competing response techniques. Stimulus control techniques, which Emily was instructed to use whenever possible, included turning the bathroom lights off during her bedtime routine and using stall bathrooms rather than individual bathrooms at work (Emily reported reluctance to pick in public bathrooms due to the fear that a coworker would see her). The therapist recommended that Emily place a sticker on her mirror to remind her not to “zoom in.” Emily was also encouraged to wear gloves during sedentary activities to reduce time spent touching her face; however, she did not agree to this recommendation because she was concerned it would “make her look stupid.” Competing response techniques, which Emily was instructed to use in response to picking urges, included sitting on her hands, making a fist, combing her cat, and preparing a meal. The social support component of habit reversal training was also introduced: Emily was encouraged to talk to her partner or post on the forum for an online skin-picking support group when she had an urge to pick.

【7】For homework, Emily was instructed to practice her stimulus control and competing response techniques. Emily was also given a self-monitoring form and a copy of the SPS and SPIS to complete and bring to the next session.

【8】### Session 4

【9】In session 4, the therapist first reviewed Emily’s self-monitoring log and self-report measures. Her SPS score was 14 and her SPIS score was 27, representing a decrease from baseline of 26 and 13 %, respectively. Emily reported noticing a decrease in focused picking, including picking only two to three times most days, picking for shorter durations, and one pick-free day (Emily’s first pick-free day in several months). Emily was surprised and pleased to discover that her efforts had been successful, although she was disappointed that she was not able to stop picking completely. The therapist congratulated Emily on her progress and on her hard work and normalized her struggle and frustration.

【10】Emily reported that she found placing reminders on her mirror to be particularly helpful in preventing picking episodes. However, she still struggled to resist strong picking urges, particularly with respect to scabs on her face (which were visible from a distance), dried skin, and urges that accompanied anger and anxiety. Therefore, the remainder of the session focused on relaxation training (e.g. diaphragmatic breathing, which was practiced in session) and identifying distress tolerance techniques. Emily had some familiarity with mindfulness (i.e. intentionally and nonjudgmentally shifting the focus of attention to what is happening in the present moment, thereby increasing awareness of emotions, urges, and behaviors) as a result of completing mindfulness-based yoga classes at the gym. The therapist therefore suggested that Emily apply her mindfulness skills to other activities that would distract or soothe her in times of distress (e.g. mindfully savoring a special treat or taking a bath).

【11】For homework, Emily was asked to brainstorm and introduce other competing responses and ways to keep her hands busy. The self-monitoring log was expanded to include successful attempts to resist picking, including which techniques Emily had successfully employed to combat the urge to pick.

【12】### Session 5

【13】The session began with a review of the past week’s self-monitoring log. Emily reported that her focused and automatic skin picking continued to decrease. For the focused picking, Emily noted that exercising was a helpful alternative to managing her negative affect and urges to pick. Emily noted that while she was able to decrease the overall frequency of the skin picking, the stronger urges remained difficult to control.

【14】Emily expressed difficulty using competing responses for automatic picking, given her lowered awareness at that time. Based on the monitoring log, Emily’s high-risk situations for automatic picking included talking on the telephone and driving. Emily was therefore encouraged to implement stimulus-control strategies during these times (e.g. driving with both hands on the wheel). She was also encouraged to engage in mindfulness in these high-risk situations. Contingency management was also introduced as a strategy to help Emily further reduce her focused picking. Emily was asked to identify “treats” that she valued and use these as rewards for meeting behavioral goals. Emily’s behavioral goals included multiple consecutive pick-free days and consistent use of stimulus control and competing response techniques. Reward contingencies included purchasing a gentle “luxury” face cleanser that Emily enjoyed, a new sweater, a new computer game, and a ski trip with her partner.

【15】For homework, the therapist instructed Emily to complete the self-monitoring log, continue stimulus control and competing response techniques, and practice mindfulness skills. She was also asked to complete the SPS and SPIS.

【16】### Sessions 6–8

【17】At the beginning of session 6, Emily’s SPS and SPIS scores were 8 and 20, representing decreases from baseline of 58 and 35 %, respectively. The therapist began sessions 6–8 by reviewing Emily’s self-monitoring logs. During these reviews, Emily was asked to identify particular situations and coping strategies that led to increases or decreases in picking urges and behaviors. Emily reported an overall decrease in picking over the course of these sessions, as well as increases in her number of total and consecutive days free from picking. Emily also noted that her automatic picking at home reduced when she began knitting again, an activity that she had enjoyed in early adulthood but which she had discontinued in recent years. Emily reported that knitting was distracting and kept her hands busy; she was also pleased to be able to gift the products to loved ones. By session 8, she was pick-free more days than not, with one period of five consecutive pick-free days (her longest stretch in “years”).

【18】However, some “slips” were observed, particularly during times of stress (following an argument with her partner or family and upon being rejected from a job for which she interviewed). Emily often became angry with herself following these slips. Cognitive interventions to reduce black-and-white thinking (e.g. challenging Emily’s belief that a single picking episode “undid” her previous success) were particularly helpful in reducing this anger. Although Emily wished to be entirely pick-free, she was ultimately able to acknowledge her considerable progress since beginning treatment.

【19】Additional interventions during these sessions included motivational interviewing 删除10：<u>(Miller and Rollnick 2013 )</u>, mindfulness exercises, and distress tolerance coaching. Motivational interviewing techniques, including “rolling with resistance,” eliciting change talk, and planning behavioral changes, were used to sustain Emily’s commitment to treatment, particularly when she became frustrated with her “slips.” Emily was reminded to apply the mindfulness and distress tolerance skills reviewed in session 5 during high-risk situations (e.g. while driving; when she noticed a “bump” or clogged pore; following arguments with her partner or family). Emily agreed to continue practicing these skills, as she found them moderately helpful.

【20】At the beginning of session 8, Emily reported an SPS score of 9 and SPIS score of 16, which corresponded to a slight increase from session 6 (attributable in part to life stress during week 7) but a decrease from baseline of 53 and 48 %, respectively. The final session was scheduled for 2 weeks later. Emily was given an additional battery of self-report measures to complete and bring to the final session.

【21】### Session 9

【22】Session 9 occurred 2 weeks after session 8 and was designed as a consolidation and relapse prevention session. Emily was asked to develop a list of skills, techniques, and observations that she had found particularly helpful in reducing her picking. Emily noted that stimulus-control techniques (especially dimming bathroom lights and placing reminders around her home) had been particularly helpful for her, as had distress tolerance techniques (e.g. taking a walk, knitting, talking with her partner and friends). Emily was also asked to list positive outcomes that she had noticed from implementing these strategies. These included healthier skin, reduced makeup (which she reported that her partner found more attractive), higher self-confidence, and reduced guilt and shame. Emily was encouraged to review this list frequently (at least weekly and whenever she had an urge to pick). Emily was also encouraged to continue her involvement in online support groups for skin picking.

【23】Emily’s self-report measures revealed a significant decrease in skin picking, with SPS and SPIS scores of 6 and 13, corresponding to a decrease of 68 and 58 %, respectively 删除33：<u></u>. Emily’s SPS score placed her below the clinical cutoff 删除10：<u>(Keuthen et al. 2001b )</u>. Emily also evidenced a significant decrease in depression symptoms (BDI-II = 16) and some decrease in worry (PSWQ = 57). However, she still experienced interference and distress as a result of these symptoms. Emily was therefore referred to a therapist known to our clinic who specialized in CBT for emotional disorders and emotional dysregulation. This therapist was also competent in skin-picking treatment.

【24】删除3：<u>Fig. 19.3

【25】Skin picking severity over treatment. SPS Skin-Picking Scale, SPIS Skin-Picking Impact Scale</u>

【26】Emily reported that she was highly satisfied with her skin-picking treatment. Her self-report measures and subjective ratings reflected considerable improvement in her skin-picking symptoms, and she scored below the clinical significance cutoff on one self-report skin-picking measure. Emily was highly motivated to continue improving her skin-picking symptoms and was invited to recontact our clinic if she experienced a relapse that she did not feel equipped to manage independently.

【27】Complicating Factors
--------------------

【28】Emily’s case was characterized by several complicating factors. First, Emily met diagnostic criteria for OCPD. Correspondingly, she presented with significant black-and-white thinking and rigidity regarding several treatment recommendations. For example, she refused a consultation with a psychiatrist. Had Emily presented with more severe or treatment-resistant psychopathology, additional cognitive interventions may have been necessary to increase her willingness to consider psychoactive medication. Additionally, Emily initially refused several dermatological recommendations (e.g. discontinuing her use of heavy makeup). However, Emily was amenable to other recommendations to reduce the likelihood of infection, including using more gentle approaches to disinfecting her skin and switching to a gentle, pH-balanced cleanser and moisturizer. Finally, Emily refused several stimulus-control techniques (e.g. wearing gloves) for fear that these would make her look “unprofessional” or “stupid.” As such, Emily continued to engage in some automatic picking until she and her therapist ultimately developed a more acceptable stimulus-control technique for her to use at home (knitting).

【29】Additional black-and-white thinking was observed in Emily’s reaction to “slips” (usually focused picking episodes), particularly following a streak of several pick-free days. Following these slips, Emily became angry with herself for “undoing” her considerable progress. Cognitive interventions focused on identifying and challenging Emily’s black-and-white distortions were necessary to help Emily place her “slips” in the context of her (much more significant) progress in treatment.

【30】Emily’s case was also characterized by subthreshold features of BPD, including impulsivity, emotion dysregulation, and fears of abandonment. These features occasionally impeded the therapy dynamic, as Emily would sometimes become irritable or impatient with the therapist or treatment. During treatment, Emily was more likely to engage in severe focused picking episodes during periods of distress. Emily also picked more following arguments with her partner and family members, which may have reflected her difficulty tolerating disruptions in these relationships. The therapist worked with Emily to help her realize the connections between arguments with loved ones and picking behavior. DBT strategies, including breathing exercises and distress tolerance skills (e.g. distraction, self-soothing) appeared moderately useful in helping Emily manage her emotions and resist the urge to pick on these occasions. Emily was also encouraged to use these skills following severe picking episodes to regulate her emotions.

【31】Emily also experienced some mild life disruptions during the course of treatment, including applying and interviewing for several new jobs, which she was not offered. These disappointments exacerbated Emily’s anxiety and depression, which resulted in more severe and damaging picking. Distress tolerance techniques were only modestly helpful on these occasions. Although Emily’s depression and anxiety were moderately reduced following her skin-picking treatment, she and the therapist agreed that referral to another cognitive-behavioral therapist was warranted to improve Emily’s overall well-being and improve her ability to tolerate and regulate her distress.

【32】Conclusions
-----------

【33】Emily was a 33-year-old Caucasian woman with excoriation (skin-picking) disorder who was successfully treated with nine sessions of CBT over 11 weeks. Treatment incorporated a combination of several cognitive-behavioral interventions, including psychoeducation, awareness training, habit reversal training, stimulus control, cognitive restructuring, contingency management, and DBT skills. Emily reported clinically significant reductions in skin-picking frequency, intensity, and impact, with reductions of 68 and 58 % reported on the SPS and SPIS, respectively 删除33：<u></u>.

【34】The heterogeneous and complex presentation of this disorder is reflected in the present case. In our clinical experience, oftentimes it is necessary to combine traditional habit reversal training with other cognitive-behavioral interventions (e.g. cognitive restructuring, distress tolerance skills) to manage comorbid psychiatric symptoms that may contribute to picking behaviors or interfere with treatment. A thorough assessment at the outset of treatment is critical to accurately identify the reinforcement contingencies that maintain the picking, as well as any other factors (e.g. comorbid psychopathology) that may complicate treatment. Ongoing assessment throughout treatment is also necessary to continually tailor the treatment course for each patient. Given the present dearth of treatment efficacy data, randomized controlled trials of cognitive-behavioral therapy for excoriation (skin-picking) disorder are warranted.

【35】Key Practice Points
-------------------

【36】   Conduct a thorough assessment to provide an accurate differential diagnosis and identify potentially complicating comorbid psychopathologies.
   Recommend the patient to consult with a dermatologist to identify any infections or skin damage that may require medical attention.
   Provide detailed psychoeducation regarding the nature of excoriation disorder, potential tissue damage associated with picking, and a rationale for treatment.
   Develop a behaviorally oriented treatment plan tailored to the individual needs of the patient.
   Continuously assess skin-picking symptoms to tailor the treatment plan and establish whether medical intervention (e.g. to treat infections) is warranted.苏锦恭

====================================================================================================
