【0】METASTATIC CARCINOMA

【1】(i) Site.— It is in the parotid region.

【2】(ii) Temperature and tenderness.— The overlying  删除换行1 skin may be somewhat warm. When the skin is infiltrated  删除换行1 it may look reddish-blue. Tenderness is usually not present.

【3】(iii) Size and shape.— Carcinoma is usually of big  删除换行1 size as it grows bigger within a short time. It may be of  删除换行1 any shape.

【4】(iv) Surface.— It is irregular.

【5】(v) Consistency.— The mass is usually hard, but  删除换行1 may be firm.

【6】(vi) Fixity.— The swelling is often fixed to deeper  删除换行1 structures. When the masseter is made taut by clenching  删除换行1 the teeth, the swelling becomes fixed and cannot be  删除换行1 moved along the line of the fibres of the masseter. But  删除换行1 slight sideways movement may be present- The skin may  删除换行1 be free but a few carcinomas show a tendency to infiltrate  删除换行1 the skin. In that case the skin cannot be lifted up off  删除换行1 the tumour.

【7】(vii) Regional lymph nodes are often enlarged and 删除换行1 hard.

【8】(viii) Facial nerve is often involved by carcinoma of  删除换行1 the parotid. This will lead to paralysis of the facial  删除换行1 muscles.

【9】(ix) General examination.— In case of few  删除换行1 carcinomas, blood-borne metastasis may be present  删除换行1 particularly to the lungs.

【10】Special Investigations.—

【11】(a) FNAC can be performed to confirm the  删除换行1 diagnosis.

【12】(b) CT Scan of the parotid region may be 删除换行1 performed to know the tumour extent.

【13】Treatment.— SURGERY is the main treatment,  删除换行1 though a few carcinomas like squamous cell carcinoma  删除换行1 and cylindroma recurrences may be treated by  删除换行1 radiotherapy.

【14】(i) Total parotidectomy with sacrifice of the facial  删除换行1 nerve should be the treatment of choice particularly in  删除换行1 cases of low grade malignant lesion such as acinar cell  删除换行1 adenocarcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma and low grade  删除换行1 mucoepidermoid carcinoma.

【15】(ii) In case of high grade malignant lesions e.g. 删除换行2 high grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma, undifferentiated  删除换行1 carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma radical neck  删除换行1 dissection should be accompanied by complete  删除换行1 parotidectomy.

【16】(iii) In a few cases of low grade malignant lesion  删除换行1 one may try to save the facial nerve while performing  删除换行1 total parotidectomy, though technically it is difficult.

【17】(iv) Local recurrences should be treated with  删除换行1 radiotherapy.

【18】(v) When complete removal is not possible,  删除换行1 superficial parotidectomy with radium implantation should  删除换行1 be the treatment of choice.

【19】(vi) When the tumour is completely fixed and  删除换行1 irremovable only palliative deep X-ray threapy may be  删除换行1 advised.

【20】RADIATION THERAPY.— If the surgeon feels that  删除换行1 there is residual cancer after radical resection, or if the  删除换行1 pathologists report 'cancer is extending to the margin of  删除换行1 the resection', in such cases postoperative cobalt therapy  删除换行1 should be initiated as soon as satisfactory wound healing  删除换行1 has been obtained.

【21】Other advanced parotid cancers that are clearly nonresectable may be controlled for many months by  删除换行1 appropriate X-ray therapy.

【22】CHEMOTHERAPY.— In occasional circumstances,  删除换行1 methotrexate or 5-fluorouracil therapy may cause limited  删除换行1 regression of malignant neoplasms of the parotid or  删除换行1 submandibular gland. But its efficacy is not established  删除换行1 for long term palliation. Infusion with cyclophosphamide  删除换行1 (Cycloxan or Endoxan) through retrograde catheter into  删除换行1 the superficial temporal artery has produced marked  删除换行1 regression in certain cases of advanced parotid carcinoma.

【23】MIKULICZ'S DISEASE AND SJOGREN’S

【24】CARCINOMA OF THE PAROTID GLAND

【25】MIKULICZ'S DISEASE is characterised by an  删除换行1 asymptomatic swelling of all or a combination of parotid,  删除换行1 submandibular and lacrymal glands. The disease can beginSALIVARY GLANDS 81 删除换行1 and remain in one gland for quite a long time.
Enlargement of the lacrimal glands will cause bulge below  删除换行1 the outer ends of the eyelids and narrowing of the  删除换行1 palpebral fissures. It also causes dryness of the mouth.

【26】SJOGREN’S SYNDROME is all the above conditions,  删除换行1 plus (i) dry eyes (Keratoconjunctivitis sicca), dry mouth  删除换行1 (xerostomia) and rheumatoid arthritis. Other connective  删除换行1 tissue diseases e.g. systemic lupus erythomatosus,  删除换行1 scleroderma, polyarteritis nodosa or Raynaud's phenomenon  删除换行1 may be present.

【27】Pathology.—

【28】The gross feature is the preservation of the lobular  删除换行1 architecture of the gland. The most important microscopic  删除换行1 change is extensive replacement of the acinar parenchyma  删除换行1 with lymphoid tissue. There is also intraductal proliferation  删除换行1 of both epithelial and myoepithelial elements. As a  删除换行1 consequence the ducts are converted into solid islands  删除换行1 some of which may eventually undergo hyalinization. In  删除换行1 general hypergammaglobulinaemia, eosinophilia, leukopenia  删除换行1 and cryoglobulinaemia are often noticed as laboratory  删除换行1 findings.

【29】The condition is regarded as an autoimmune disease,  删除换行1 very much resembles Hashimut is' disease of the thyroid.
Presence of circulating antisalivary gland antibodies can  删除换行1 be demonstrated. Autoantibodies such as rheumatoid factor  删除换行1 and antinuclear factor may be demonstrated in the serum.

【30】It must be remembered that diffuse enlargement of  删除换行1 the salivary and lacrimal glands may be seen in such  删除换行1 cases as malignant lymphoma, tuberculosis, sarcoidosis and  删除换行1 even syphilis.

【31】Clinical features.—

【32】(i) This condition predominantly occurs in 删除换行1 women.

【33】(ii) Majority of the patients are over 40 years of 删除换行1 age.

【34】(iii) The condition develops slowly and painlessly.

【35】(iv) Systemic manifestations are the main features  删除换行1 of Sjogren's syndrome. Rheumatoid arthritis mainly affects  删除换行1 the small joints and is generalised.

【36】HISTORY.—

【37】(i) Rare complications of Mikulicz's disease is the  删除换行1 development of malignant lymphoma within the involved  删除换行1 salivary glands.

【38】(ii) There may be occurrence of malignant variant  删除换行1 of Mikulicz's disease, which is an extremely rare  删除换行1 occurrence and is characterised by repeated local  删除换行1 recurrences and eventually lymph node metastasis.

【39】Treatment.—

【40】(i) The condition may resolve by itself after  删除换行1 months or years.

【41】(ii) Steroids and immunosuppressive agents may be  删除换行1 used, but one should be aware of the side effects. Such  删除换行1 treatment also increases the risk of ascending infection.

【42】(iii) Radiotherapy may reduce the enlargement of  删除换行1 the salivary gland of Mikulicz's disease, but increases  删除换行1 dryness of the mouth and tendency towards infection.

【43】(iv) Oral hygiene should be particularly maintained.

【44】(v) Surgery.— It may be tried when steroid therapy  删除换行1 and X-ray therapy cannot improve the condition.
Superficial parotidectomy and excision of the  删除换行1 submandibular salivary glands will definitely reduce the  删除换行1 deformity. Lacrimal glands should be left alone.

【45】SYMPTOMS.—
A parotid fistula may arise from the parotid gland  删除换行1 or the parwtid duct. Such fistula may be internal when  删除换行1 it opens inside the mouth or external when it opens to  删除换行1 the exterior.

【46】CAUSES.— Parotid fistula may occur from :

【47】(i) Penetrating injury particularly by glass splinters.

【48】(ii) Rupture of parotid abscess.

【49】(iii) Inadvertent incision for drainage of parotid  删除换行1 abscess.

【50】(iv) Complication of superficial parotidectomy.

【51】Clinical features.—

【52】The main complaint is an opening on the cheek  删除换行1 with discharge. On careful questioning it will be evident  删除换行1 that discharge comes out only during meals. There may  删除换行1 be excoriation of the neighbourhood skin.

【53】Special Investigations.—•

【54】A sialogram should be performed with watery solution  删除换行1 of lipiodol. This will give an indication whether the fistula  删除换行1 is in relation to the main duct, ductule or to the gland.

【55】Treatment.—
(i) When the fistula is connected with the main  删除换行1 duct — reconstruction of the duct by Newman or  删除换行5 Seabrock's operation should be performed. In this  删除换行1 operation one probe is passed through the parotid duct  删除换行1 opening in the mouth in a rertograde fashion into the  删除换行1 parotid duct upto the fistula. Another probe is introduced  删除换行1 through the external fistula. A horizontal incision is made  删除换行1 on the cheek. The ducts are dissected out and the divided  删除换行1 ends are identified and made free. A tantalum wire is  删除换行1 passed into the distal and proximal ends of the duct.
The severed ends are now sutured with free chromic  删除换行1 catgut over the tantalum wire. The adjacent connective  删除换行1 tissues are approximated with great care so that there is  删除换行1 no chance of recurrence. The skin incision is closed. The 删除换行1 end of the tantalum wire which comes out through the  删除换行1 parotid duct opening into the mouth is anchored by  删除换行1 adhesive plaster.

【56】The wire is kept in situ for 3 weeks.

【57】(ii) If reconstruction fails, the auriculotemporal  删除换行1 nerve which carries secretomotor fibres to the parotid  删除换行1 gland is resected.

【58】(iii) If the above method fails, complete  删除换行1 parotidectomy is advised preserving the facial nerve.

【59】AURICHLOTEMPC删除38：<u>)</u>RAL SYNDROME
(SYN. FREY’S SYNDROME)

【60】Partial injury to the auriculotemporal nerve gives rise  删除换行1 to such syndrome. This type of injury —

【61】(i) May be congenital, possibly due to birth 删除换行1 trauma.

【62】(ii) May be accidental injury.

【63】(iii) May be caused by inadvertent incision for  删除换行1 drainage of parotid abscess.

【64】(iv) May occasionally follow superficial  删除换行1 parotidectomy.

【65】In this condition (a) there is flushing and sweating  删除换行1 of the skin innervated by the auriculotemporal nerve  删除换行1 particularly during meal and (b) presence of cutaneous  删除换行1 hyperaesthesia in front and above the ear the area supplied  删除换行1 by the auriculotemporal nerve.

【66】The EXPLANATION of this syndrome is —

【67】(i) The postganglionic parasympathetic fibres  删除换行1 become united to the sympathetic nerves from the  删除换行1 superior cervical ganglion which are concerned to supply  删除换行1 vessels and sweat glands of that region. This causes  删除换行1 flushing and sweating of the skin.

【68】(ii) Following injury to the auriculotemporal nerve,  删除换行1 postganglionic parasympathetic fibres from the otic  删除换行1 ganglion grow down the sheaths of the cutaneous  删除换行1 filaments, so hyperaesthesia follows stimulation of the  删除换行1 secretomotor nerves.

【69】EXAMINATIONS.—

【70】If the symptoms persist, the treatment is avulsion of  删除换行1 the auriculotemporal nerve in front of the auricle where  删除换行1 it lies just posterior to the superficial temporal vessels.

【71】SYNDROME

【72】Salivary stones are more common in the  删除换行1 submandibular salivary gland than in the parotid gland  删除换行1 because the saliva of the submandibular salivary gland is 删除换行1 more viscid and saturated in calcium salts. Such stones  删除换行1 develop more frequently within the duct of the  删除换行1 submandibular gland (Wharton's duct). Less commonly  删除换行1 the calculi may occur within the gland substance.

【73】AETIOLOGY.— Pathogenesis of calculus formation  删除换行1 is unknown. It has been suggested —

【74】(i) That chronic inflammation may cause  删除换行1 inspissation of the saliva and deposition of calcium salts.

【75】(ii) That retention of secretion may cause calculi  删除换行1 formation. Such retention is more common in the  删除换行1 submandibular salivary gland as the duct has a very  删除换行1 curved route and the secretion from the superficial lobe  删除换行1 goes up and reach the submandibular duct through the  删除换行1 deep part which is not a dependent drainage.

【76】Composition of the stone.—

【77】A salivary gland calculus is composed of cellular  删除换行1 debris and mucus in the centre, but the main content is  删除换行1 calcium and magnesium phosphate. Such combination is  删除换行1 found in tartar of the tooth.

【78】Clinical features.—

【79】Painful swelling during meals is the most important  删除换行1 symptom. Such pain may be preceded by salivary colic.
When this history is forthcoming, the patient should be  删除换行1 given some lemon juice and the swelling can be produced.
At this time if one examines the orifice of the affected  删除换行1 duct, it shows little or no ejection of saliva.

【80】COMPLICATIONS.—

【81】(i) Age.— Majority of the patients are young to  删除换行1 middle age. This condition is rarely seen in children.

【82】(ii) Sex.— Males and females are almost equally  删除换行1 involved.

【83】PAROTID FISTULA

【84】(i) The main complaint is pain and swelling  删除换行1 beneath the jaw just before and during meals. Both the  删除换行1 symptoms last throughout the meal. After certain period  删除换行1 the pain and the swelling gradually subside.

【85】(ii) Some residual pain and swelling beneath the  删除换行1 jaw may be the constant complaint.

【86】(iii) Some discomfort or swelling may be  删除换行1 complained of in the floor of the mouth. Some patients  删除换行1 may give a typical history of colic just before the meals.

【87】(iv) Patient may be able to relieve his symptoms  删除换行1 by pressing on the gland. On the other hand such action  删除换行1 may lead to ejection of foul tasting fluid in the mouth  删除换行1 (purulent saliva).

【88】(v) Patient may give previous history of similar  删除换行1 symptom on the other side of the face.SALIVARY GLANDS 83

【89】TREATMENT.—

【90】Sometimes the submandibular gland may be swollen  删除换行1 when the patient presents to the doctor. If such swelling  删除换行1 is not present, the clinician can produce the condition  删除换行1 artificially by instilling a few drops of lemon juice into  删除换行1 the patient's mouth. This will cause pain and swelling of  删除换行1 the gland. The clinician must look at the opening of the  删除换行1 involved duct and no saliva is seen to be coming out  删除换行1 through that orifice.

【91】Once the swelling is detected, the lump is examined  删除换行1 in the following manner —

【92】(i) Temperature and tenderness.— Usually the gland  删除换行1 is not hot, but if it is infected, it may be hot and the  删除换行1 overlying skin will be red and oedematous. Slight  删除换行1 tenderness may be expected.

【93】(ii) Consistency.— The distended gland feels elastic,  删除换行1 rubbery and firm.

【94】(iii) Bimanual palpation is important. The gland is  删除换行1 felt between the index finger of one hand inside the  删除换行1 mouth and fingers of the other hand on the outer surface  删除换行1 of the lump just below the mandible 删除33：<u></u>. The finger inside the  删除换行1 mouth can feel the deep part of the salivary gland. To  删除换行1 exclude impaction of the stone in the duct, the whole 删除换行1 duct must be palpated bimanually.

【95】The floor Of The Mouth.—

【96】Inspection.— The patient is asked to open his mouth  删除换行1 and lift his tongue to the roof of the mouth. This  删除换行1 displays the floor of the mouth for inspection. By means  删除换行1 of a torch it is inspected carefully. The orifices of the  删除换行1 submandibular (Wharton's) ducts are situated on the  删除换行1 either side of frenulum linguae. It is noted whether the  删除换行1 orifice looks inflamed or swollen due to impaction of a  删除换行1 stone in the duct. A stone may be impacted in the  删除换行1 ampulla just beneath the orifice and can be seen if  删除换行1 inspected carefully. If the salivary gland is infected, slight  删除换行1 pressure on the gland will extrude pus through the  删除换行1 respective orifice. If a stone is impacted in one duct,  删除换行1 saliva will be seen coming out with normal flow from  删除换行1 the other orifice while the orifice concerned remains dry.
This may be tested by two dry swabs one on each orifice  删除换行1 and some lemon juice may be dropped on the dorsum  删除换行1 of the tongue. A minute later the patient is asked to  删除换行1 move the tongue up and two swabs are examined. The  删除换行1 swab on the orifice of the duct where the stone is  删除换行1 impacted will remain dry.苏锦恭

====================================================================================================
