【0】Clinical care of incarcerated adults

【1】INTRODUCTION 

【2】Health care in the correctional system, which consists of local, state, and federal jails and prisons, should be available and provided at the same standard as health care in the general population. The provision of medical care in correctional facilities has been strongly informed in the United States by the legal case of Estelle v. Gamble, 1976 . In this case, the Supreme Court deemed that deliberate indifference to serious illness or injury in a prisoner can be considered cruel and unusual punishment, in violation of the Eighth Amendment of the Constitution. Cases following this ruling have upheld three basic rights: the right to access to care, the right to care that has been ordered by a health professional, and the right to a professional medical judgment.

【3】Correctional medicine provides an opportunity to promote public health in a targeted, high-risk population . Unfortunately, health care data sets intended to be nationally representative in the United States frequently exclude individuals who are incarcerated, so that health information for the incarcerated population is not complete .

【4】Specific medical conditions, such as coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), are of critical concern due to their high prevalence among incarcerated individuals and the increased risks for transmission of infection due to congregate living conditions . Since the disease burden is high, correctional medicine may be more demanding and costly than care for nonincarcerated populations of similar age.

【5】In addition to the high-risk population served, the design of jails, prisons, and correctional health services may unintentionally facilitate the transmission of disease . Correctional facilities often lack space for isolating people with communicable diseases, and overcrowding is a risk factor for communicable diseases. Infection control in correctional facilities may be adversely impacted by limited access to showers and drinking water, a limited supply of clean clothes, little access to soap and personal hygiene products, and prohibitions against bleach and condoms . People in jails and prisons may be expected to wash their own laundry by hand, rather than use institutional laundry services, and this may be insufficient to disinfect clothing. Additionally, kitchen workers and barbers in correctional facilities may have inadequate training in infection control.

【6】This topic addresses health issues of particular relevance to the adult incarcerated population. Issues related to care of children of incarcerated parents and caregivers are discussed separately.

【7】DEFINITIONS 

【8】In the United States, correctional facilities include both prisons and jails. Jails are generally local or county institutions, detaining individuals awaiting trial and sentencing, as well as some who have been sentenced to short prison terms or who are being transferred between facilities. Jails often have the added responsibility of managing acute health problems, such as alcohol or drug withdrawal, which are less likely to confront health care staff in prisons. Persons detained in jails generally have short stays, although jails may also house individuals when prisons are overcrowded.

【9】Prisons in the United States generally house persons who have been sentenced to longer terms, including life sentences. State and federal prisons house individuals who have been convicted of a crime and sentenced either by a state or the federal government, respectively. People who have violated the terms of their parole or probation generally go directly to prisons, although this varies by state. A few states, and some other countries, including England and Wales, have combined jail and prison facilities that include individuals awaiting trial or sentencing and those serving sentences.

【10】Individuals on parole (sometimes called community supervision) have been released from prison but are still under the supervision of the criminal justice system and may return to prison for violation of their parole terms. Probation refers to the supervision of individuals as an alternative to incarceration.

【11】In prisons, jails, and juvenile facilities, solitary confinement may be referred to by different terms (eg, isolation, maximum security, restrictive housing) and implies that an individual has limited "meaningful" contact with other people .

【12】HEALTH SERVICES IN CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES 

【13】Health service availability and delivery in jails and prisons vary by country and region. There is wide variation in the size of jails and prisons, and facilities are often in rural locations and geographically isolated.

【14】Financial and human resource constraints pose challenges for correctional systems in meeting the significant medical needs of the individuals housed in those facilities . An international systematic review identified inconsistent reporting of health care expenditures in prisons, with spending estimated from USD $34 (Sri Lanka) to $6714 (United Kingdom) per person in prison annually . In 2015, prison medical spending was estimated at approximately $8.1 billion in the United States with substantial variation by state; annual spending per incarcerated person ranged from just over $2000 per person in Louisiana to nearly $20,000 in California . Many individuals have not had adequate access to health care prior to their incarceration and have medical needs at the time of booking and intake. Furthermore, community resources to care for their needs after release may be lacking or difficult to procure . Thus, correctional providers face the complex task of addressing barriers to meeting the health needs of their patients while striving for quality goals. Groups have sought to identify appropriate quality and patient safety indicators for care in jail/prison settings  and apply quality improvement and patient safety principles to correctional health care .

【15】Health services in correctional facilities are provided in a variety of ways. Counties, territories, states, or the federal government may hire their own health providers and administer their own health care. In the United States, health care may be managed using for-profit contractors, an academic medical center may be involved in providing care , or local public health departments may provide care to those detained in jails. One observational study identified lower mortality rates in publicly operated prisons compared with privatized prisons . In Australia, health services are provided by the Department of Health in some areas and by the Department of Justice or Corrections in others . Telemedicine has made inroads into correctional health care to address the lack of availability of specialty services in some rural areas or in a geographically large state such as Michigan . The COVID-19 pandemic has accelerated efforts to improve access to telemedicine and mobile electronic health records in the United Kingdom .

【16】In the United States, patients may face disruptions in insurance coverage during incarceration . The burden of paying for medical services in correctional facilities has historically been the responsibility of the county, state, or federal government. Sometimes, patients in correctional facilities are charged copayments to access health care services . The National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC) has issued a position statement opposing the use of fees for medical care in correctional institutions that restrict access to care .

【17】DEMOGRAPHICS 

【18】Globally, there are more than 10 million people in correctional facilities, although the number may be greater than 11 million given some underreporting of people on pretrial detention . In the United States at year-end in 2019, 6.3 million people were under correctional supervision (eg, in jail, prison, on probation, or on parole), representing 2.5 percent of the adult population . While the number of people in prison in the United States tripled between 1987 and 2007 , the population has declined since 2009 . Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, there were approximately 10.3 million jail admissions and 577,000 prison admissions per year . In the United States, Black and Hispanic individuals are disproportionately represented among incarcerated persons  .

【19】Estimates from 2011 and 2012 suggest that approximately 18 percent of individuals in United States jails and 20 percent of those in United States prisons spent time in restrictive housing (eg, isolation, maximum security), with an estimated 2.7 and 4.4 percent of individuals in jails and prisons housed in restrictive housing a day, respectively .

【20】GUIDELINES 

【21】Special challenges are posed by delivering health care in jails and prisons while maintaining security and safety for health care personnel and patients and adhering to appropriate ethical standards. Several organizations have created guidelines and standards for the delivery of health care in correctional facilities. For instance, the World Health Organization (WHO) Regional Office for Europe has published guidance on a wide range of issues related to the provision of health care for incarcerated persons, including mental health, drug treatment, tuberculosis (TB), and solitary confinement . In the United States, the National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC) has published a number of guidelines for health care in correctional settings and standards for compliance with acceptable health care in correctional facilities . NCCHC has also issued a position statement on the use of solitary confinement in correctional facilities .

【22】In addition, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the WHO have published guidelines for the prevention and control of infectious diseases including TB and COVID-19 in correctional facilities . The United States Preventive Services Task Force has also issued guidelines on screening for latent tuberculosis infection relevant to adults who have a history of incarceration .

【23】Accreditation of medical services in jails and prisons is voluntary. Both the NCCHC and the American Correctional Association offer voluntary accreditation of correctional health care services.

【24】INITIAL SCREENING AND ASSESSMENT 

【25】Upon entrance to a correctional facility from the community, individuals should be screened for transmissible diseases, acute and chronic medical and psychiatric problems, optical and dental needs, potential drug and alcohol withdrawal, injuries, conditions that may have an immediate flare or require uninterrupted medical treatment (eg, treatment for cancer or tuberculosis \[TB\]), continuing medication therapy, suicide risk, and pregnancy. In addition, during periods of active community spread of infectious disease (eg, such as during the COVID-19 pandemic), those entering correctional facilities from the community or transferring in from other facilities should be carefully screened for the presence of infection . The following conditions should be considered for screening.

【26】Drug and alcohol withdrawal — Based upon 2019 national data from the Bureau of Justice Statistics, 4.8 percent of individuals entering local jails were treated for opioid withdrawal . Approximately 64 percent of all individuals sentenced to prisons reported drug use in the month prior to their arrest . In addition, almost half of individuals met criteria for substance use disorder prior to admission, with 40 percent having a drug use disorder and 21 percent having an alcohol use disorder (AUD). Among admissions to jails screened , 14.5 percent met criteria for opioid use disorder .

【27】In a systematic review of international studies on substance use disorders at entrance into prison, estimates of AUDs (abuse/dependence) were 17 to 30 percent for males and 10 to 24 percent for females; estimates of substance use disorders were 10 to 48 percent for males and 30 to 60 percent for females .

【28】The high rates of drug and alcohol use, and potentially life-threatening complications from unrecognized withdrawal, make initial screening for alcohol, benzodiazepine, and barbiturate withdrawal crucial. Ongoing monitoring for use and withdrawal syndromes may be necessary, since alcohol and drug use may occur in jails and prisons . Appropriate and effective treatment of withdrawal may decrease drug use and syringe-sharing during incarceration and improve the ability of people in jails and prisons to make informed legal decisions .

【29】The management of withdrawal syndromes is discussed elsewhere.

【30】Injuries — Injuries from both accidents and violence are common during incarceration . They are often related to altercations that led detainees to jail, skirmishes with police officers, sports in jail or prison, deliberate self-harm, attempted suicide, and conflicts with other individuals in jails and prisons. A study of people in Texas prisons demonstrated that 2.9 percent were treated for fractures during a one-year period . Injuries were the most common cause of evaluation at a local Scottish emergency department close to a prison: 22 percent of injuries were due to deliberate self-harm, 18 percent due to injury resulting from violence, and 15 percent due to sports injury .

【31】Continuity of care for chronic conditions — Many chronic medical problems require uninterrupted medication, even during short periods of incarceration. Inquiry into the possibility of these conditions, as well as inquiry into medications used, is essential at reception into jail. An evaluation by a health professional or a complete health assessment is often recommended within a 7- to 14-day time window from admission to the jail/prison ; this delay should not result in interruption of maintenance medications. Medication changes in regimens at entry into prison can have untoward effects on the mental health of individuals with mental health disorders .

【32】Uninterrupted medication is crucial for many medical conditions, including human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) therapy, TB, psychotic conditions, asthma, seizure disorders, coronary artery disease, diabetes mellitus, deep venous thrombosis, arrhythmias, and rheumatologic conditions. Brief lapses in therapy can have significant untoward effects, such as diabetic ketoacidosis or the evolution of resistance for HIV therapy.

【33】Obtaining an accurate list of medications and dosing from the patient's community provider should be a priority, especially if any doubt is present about dosing. This is particularly important for opioid pain medications, which can be the source of friction between patients and correctional facility providers; providers may fear that opioid pain medications will be misused, while patients fear inadequate pain relief.

【34】Prevention of suicide and self-harm — In many countries, self-harm and suicide are common concerns in prisons and jails . In 2018, more suicide deaths were reported in United States prisons than any prior year on record, and the Bureau of Justice Statistics reported that the suicide mortality rate in prisons was slightly higher than in the general population . In an international study comparing suicide rates between the incarcerated versus nonincarcerated population, the risk of suicide for incarcerated males was three times greater, and for incarcerated females nine times greater, than in the nonincarcerated male and female population respectively .

【35】Self-harm includes intentional self-poisoning or self-injury, regardless of underlying motive or suicidal intent. A study in United Kingdom prisons found that self-harm (mostly of low lethality) was reported for 5 to 6 percent of incarcerated males and 20 to 24 percent of females . Among males, suicide rates for those who self-harmed were approximately four times the rates for those who did not self-harm; in females, rates of suicide were approximately 1.5-fold for those who self-harmed compared with those who did not.

【36】A number of risk factors have been identified for self-harm and suicide while incarcerated . In an international systematic review, risk factors associated with an increased risk of suicide in prison included male sex, being married, suicidal ideation, psychiatric diagnoses, living in a single-cell accommodation, no social visits, serving a life sentence, remand status (pretrial detention), and having a violent offense . Additional risk factors for self-harm include prior self-harm, borderline personality disorder, solitary confinement, disciplinary infractions, and physical or sexual victimization .

【37】Several suicide screening instruments exist for correctional facilities . Recommended suicide prevention practices include the presence of explicit prevention policies that have been reviewed by medical or mental health professionals, baseline and annual staff training, screening, and psychological autopsies after completed suicides . Additional recommendations include identifying individuals with prior suicidal behavior and treating psychiatric disorders.

【38】One factor that seems to predict success in suicide prevention is not leaving at-risk incarcerated people alone . The least restrictive environment possible should be used, and the use of administrative segregation in a punitive manner should be avoided . However, segregation with observation is common practice for those screened and found to be at suicidal risk, typically due to constraints related to limited resources.

【39】Pregnancy testing — Individuals at risk for pregnancy should be tested if new medications are initiated at intake, if radiographs are required, or if they may be likely to undergo opiate withdrawal. People who might be pregnant or who are concerned that they are pregnant should also be tested.

【40】All pregnant patients should be referred to appropriate prenatal services.

【41】Infectious diseases

【42】Chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, and Trichomonas vaginalis — Risk factors for sexually transmitted infections, including trading sex for money, are common among people in jails and prisons . Rates of infections with chlamydia, gonococcus, syphilis, and _Trichomonas vaginalis_ are high in jails . As examples:

【43】 In a study in a Los Angeles jail from 2002 to 2012 (n = 76,207), among females who agreed to be tested, 11 percent were positive for chlamydia and 3 percent for gonorrhea . Forty-three percent of females testing positive for gonorrhea were also positive for chlamydia. By comparison, overall rates among females in the United States in 2008 were 0.6 percent for chlamydia and 0.1 percent for gonorrhea . Among male detainees, 6.2 percent at an Illinois jail had chlamydia or gonorrhea .

【44】 In Brazil, from 2011 to 2014, the prevalence of syphilis among incarcerated pregnant people was estimated at 8.7 percent, with an estimated 68 percent mother-to-child transmission .

【45】 In a Los Angeles jail, between 2006 and 2009, among females who agreed to be tested, 1.4 percent were positive for syphilis . Syphilis seroprevalence rates are higher among older adult detainees than adolescents .

【46】 _T. vaginalis_ infections were identified in 8.5 percent of a sample of female in United States federal prisons .

【47】 Among individuals entering Australian prisons in 2014, there were three sexually transmitted infections per 100 people .

【48】Local incarceration rates have been also associated with county rates of chlamydia and gonorrhea . Screening for sexually transmitted infections in jails may reduce community rates of these infections following detainee release . Nonetheless, active case finding in correctional institutions is not universally performed, but systematic reviews suggest active case finding is warranted given high detection rates .

【49】The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends the following STI screening upon correctional facility intake: chlamydia, gonorrhea, and _T. vaginalis_ screening for females ≤35 years, and chlamydia and gonorrhea screening for males <30 years . The US Preventive Health Services Task Force (USPSTF) also recommends screening for chlamydial infection in sexually active females <25 years old as well as in older females at increased risk of infection . These guidelines are not specific to correctional facilities, but they are applicable to those settings.

【50】The CDC also states that universal screening for syphilis in carceral settings should be based upon local and institutional prevalence .

【51】Testing and treatment of sexually transmitted infections are reviewed elsewhere.

【52】Tuberculosis — The incarcerated population has a high risk of latent TB infection , and incarcerated adults are at higher risk for active TB than the general population  . In the United States, 2.3 percent of all identified active TB cases in 2021 were in incarcerated individuals . Contributing factors are a higher-than-average risk of HIV, history of drug use, and homelessness.

【53】Rates of active TB are also high in incarcerated populations globally. As examples, the rate was 2.1 percent among those screened in four correctional facilities in South Africa  and 0.8 percent among nine prisons in Ethiopia . In systematic review including prison populations in the European Union/European Economic Area, the prevalence of active TB varied from 0.12 to 0.3 percent .

【54】Correctional facilities provide environments that may promote person-to-person TB transmission due to communal living, poor ventilation, and overcrowding . Possible secondary transmission of TB to visitors  and correctional employees  has been reported. Additionally, the frequent movement of individuals between correctional environments and the community, and between different correctional facilities, provides additional avenues for spread of infection.

【55】CDC guidelines for the prevention and control of TB in correctional facilities advise specific inquiry about the possibility of TB during the initial medical screening and prior to integration with the general correction population . A systematic screening tool should be administered by trained staff to ascertain any prior history of TB or symptoms of active TB, including prolonged cough, hemoptysis, or chest pain. Individuals with symptoms should be placed in an airborne infection isolation room and evaluated for TB (chest radiograph, Mantoux tuberculin skin test or interferon-gamma release assay blood test, and sputum examination if indicated).

【56】The United States Preventive Services Task Force recommends screening adults in correctional facilities for latent TB infection . The CDC recommends a yearly assessment of each correctional environment for the risk of TB transmission and classifies the facility into minimal risk or nonminimal risk TB categories based on specific criteria. Facility risk assessment can help determine the implementation of further TB screening within a given facility. Screening with chest radiographs, the Mantoux tuberculin skin test , or an interferon-gamma release assay blood test is generally recommended in nonminimal risk facilities and among people at high risk for TB in minimal-risk facilities. Latent TB should be treated in correctional facilities, with attention to the likelihood of completion of TB treatment prior to release.

【57】People in jails and prisons and employees with symptoms of active TB should be identified quickly and reported to local health departments. Persons with possible TB should be isolated in airborne infection isolation rooms, if available at the correctional facility, or transferred to a facility with appropriate isolation rooms. Persons with suspected or confirmed active TB should be treated with directly observed therapy .

【58】The diagnosis and management of TB and latent TB infection are discussed in detail separately.

【59】Testing for HIV — HIV prevalence estimates in jails and prisons are highly variable, ranging from 0.3 to 26.6 percent .

【60】HIV screening policies differ by correctional system, ranging from mandatory screening upon intake or release, to voluntary testing in response to patient request or clinical indication . In the United States, the CDC recommends an "opt-out" policy for HIV screening in correctional health care settings (ie, the individual should be informed that HIV screening will be performed unless specifically declined) . In one state prison system, the rate of HIV screening increased with sequential changes over time in testing policy as follows: 5 percent for testing on request; 72 percent for opt-in; 90 percent for opt-out . The CDC also recommends that patients at high risk for HIV infection be screened for HIV infection at least annually. A more general discussion of HIV screening is presented elsewhere.

【61】Based upon the CDC definition of high risk (people who inject drugs, persons who exchange sex for money or drugs, men who have sex with men, sex partners of individuals with HIV infection, and individuals who have had more than one sex partner or whose partners have had more than one sex partner since their last HIV test), many individuals in correctional facilities are high risk and therefore should be considered for annual HIV testing. Furthermore, since people in correctional facilities may be hesitant to report high-risk behavior in prison (ie, needle sharing, sexual contact, or rape), testing on demand is also offered in many settings.

【62】It is paramount that plans be explicitly made at the time of testing to provide HIV test results to inmates who may be released before the results are available. Results from Rhode Island suggest that HIV testing within 24 hours of admission to a correctional facility resulted in greater identification of previously unknown cases of HIV than delayed testing at seven days . The role of rapid HIV testing in corrections is growing . The necessity for confirmatory testing of positive rapid tests should be emphasized to patients, and confidentiality of results is all-important in the correctional setting.

【63】Hepatitis B — In Australia, 18 percent of people entering prison tested positive for hepatitis B core antibody . In the European Union/European Economic Area, active case finding for hepatitis B virus (HBV) yielded positive results in 0.6 to 13 percent across included studies . The CDC recommends screening for persons incarcerated in a jail, prison, or other detention setting  . The USPSTF does not specifically recommend HBV screening of incarcerated persons, although it does recommend screening in populations with a prevalence of HBsAg ≥2 percent, such as populations who have injected drugs .

【64】The CDC recommends that all incarcerated adults who do not have proof of prior vaccination or serologic evidence of immunity be vaccinated against HBV, including pregnant individuals  . Immunization records should be transferred to the individual's medical provider in the community upon release.

【65】Hepatitis C — The prevalence of chronic hepatitis C in United States jails has been estimated as ranging from 12 to 35 percent , and most people are unaware of their infection . In Australia, 31 percent of people entering prisons tested positive for hepatitis C antibody . Based on modeled data from 2014, an estimated 15 percent of incarcerated people worldwide had hepatitis C virus (HCV) .

【66】Correctional facilities are an ideal place for targeted prevention . Efforts should be made to identify individuals with HCV infection and educate them about HCV. CDC guidelines recommend an assessment of risk factors for hepatitis C at entry and at medical evaluations, and testing of individuals with risk factors for hepatitis C . However, screening only those reporting risk may miss a significant number of people with HCV: in one report from the Rhode Island Department of Corrections, 66 percent of males who tested positive for HCV did not report injection drug use .

【67】A rapid fingerstick test is available to screen for HCV. Some have argued for opt-out routine testing for HCV for jail entrants, recognizing that treatment for confirmed positive tests would require counseling and coordination with outside medical services on release from jail . This strategy might identify half a million new cases of hepatitis C in the first year of implementation.

【68】COVID-19 — COVID-19, a highly infectious respiratory viral illness, is easily transmissible in institutional settings such as correctional facilities. Upon entrance into a correctional facility (from the community or from another facility), incarcerated persons should be screened for active infection according to guidelines issued by the CDC and the World Health Organization (WHO) . In addition, corrections staff  and visitors should be screened for symptoms.

【69】CDC guidelines and the National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC) position statement suggest that people who are incarcerated and staff should be offered and prioritized for COVID-19 vaccination .

【70】MANAGEMENT FOR SPECIFIC CONDITIONS AND POPULATIONS 

【71】The traditional model of health care delivery in correctional facilities has been "sick call," in which patients with symptoms are brought to providers for evaluation and treatment. The high prevalence of chronic conditions and opportunities for prevention among the incarcerated requires an approach that also incorporates routine scheduled follow-up visits and chronic disease management clinics. One review from Switzerland suggests targeting four high-risk conditions for preventive measures among the incarcerated population: tuberculosis (TB), HIV, hepatitis, and sexually transmitted infections . Management of chronic disease has the potential to not only improve health for the individual but also to decrease costs of care for complications and off-site transport and treatment.

【72】Asthma — In the United States, the prevalence of asthma in state and federal prisons is approximately 15 percent , in contrast to 10 percent in the general population . In Australia, 31 percent of females and 22 percent of males entering prison reported a history of asthma .

【73】Potential barriers to quality asthma care in the correctional setting include lack of timely access to urgent care and restrictions on patients carrying their own medications . Efforts should be made to minimize these barriers.

【74】The clinical management of asthma is discussed separately.

【75】Diabetes mellitus — The prevalence of diabetes mellitus is approximately 9 percent in United States prisons and 4 percent among people in Australian prisons .

【76】Managing diabetes mellitus poses special challenges for people in correctional facilities. Restrictions on use of injecting equipment and blood glucose monitoring limit patient autonomy, an important component of diabetes self-care . Self-management of diabetes (self-testing and administration of insulin) should be encouraged within the limits of individual facility policies. Other problems include the timing and type of food, limited exercise, and delays in accessing medical care. Efforts should be made to assess facility resources for diabetes management and transfer people with diabetes to facilities with 24-hour nursing care and better dietary resources, when appropriate.

【77】The American Diabetes Association has issued guidelines for diabetes care in correctional settings . Patients with risk factors for diabetes should be screened, and pregnant individuals should be assessed for gestational diabetes. A team approach to diabetes management is emphasized, as is self-management education. Correctional staff should be trained to recognize and treat hypo- and hyperglycemia.

【78】The Federal Bureau of Prisons offers clinical guidance for the treatment of diabetes in federal prisons. As an example, they address contingency plans if a lockdown or other emergency occurs after administration of insulin and prior to eating .

【79】Fundamentally, the standard of care should be the same as that for the general population, accommodating additional precautions that may be necessary due to security constraints in the correctional setting.

【80】Seizure disorders — Seizure disorders are more common in the incarcerated population than in the general United States population. Prevalence among people in Texas prisons was 1.9 percent  compared with 0.5 percent in the general population . Higher prevalence of substance use disorders and history of head trauma may contribute to the higher rate of seizures among people in correctional facilities.

【81】Details of the management of first seizures, epilepsy, and alcohol withdrawal seizures are found elsewhere.

【82】Infectious diseases — Correctional facilities have the potential for easy transmission of infectious diseases due to the higher prevalence of certain infections among incarcerated persons, congregate living conditions, and typically limited access to personal hygiene supplies.

【83】Influenza and COVID-19 — The prevention and management of highly infectious viral respiratory diseases such as influenza and COVID-19 present unique challenges in correctional facilities.

【84】 **COVID-19** – COVID-19, a highly infectious respiratory viral illness, is easily transmissible in institutional settings such as correctional facilities . The disease spreads readily in a crowded institutional setting, affecting incarcerated persons and correctional staff alike.

【85】Between March 1 and June 20, 2020, the case positivity rate in United States jails was 11.4 percent, with just over 23,000 positive COVID-19 tests. By June, 2020, there were over 42,000 COVID-19 cases and 510 deaths among all incarcerated United States adults, with a case rate and adjusted death rate higher than among the general United States population  .

【86】Increasing challenges in controlling the spread of the infection in prisons and jails have prompted decarceration and vaccination as infection control strategies . In Massachusetts, prison crowding has been shown to be positively associated with county-level COVID-19 incidence rates, and single-cell occupancy is associated with reduced prison COVID-19 incidence . Decarceration involves the implementation of policies to lower the number of prisoners in a facility by reducing correctional admissions and/or releasing individuals prior to their planned release date. This allows for greater physical distancing in facilities (eg, one person per cell). An analysis of United States data suggests that county jail decarceration by 80 percent may reduce COVID-19 daily growth rates by 2 percent. To put these findings in context, prison visitation bans have been associated with a 1.2 percent reduction in growth rates; statewide mask policies, a 2.5 percent reduction; and stay-at-home policies, a 0.8 percent reduction . Nine percent of people in jails received expedited release due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

【87】COVID-19 vaccination should be widely administered to correctional populations (including incarcerated persons as well as correctional facility staff) as an essential component of a COVID-19 infection control strategy . In 2020, a survey of over 5000 detained or incarcerated people suggested that about 10 percent were hesitant to be vaccinated and 45 percent would refuse vaccination again. Common concerns among people who did not want vaccination included efficacy and safety concerns, desire for more information or to see if others got vaccinated, poor risk perception, and distrust of health care or correctional and government institutions .

【88】If an individual with COVID-19 is released from a correctional institution to recover in the community, the facility should arrange for an appropriate discharge plan for medical isolation, social support, and information on available medical follow-up during recovery . Facilities who have provided vaccination should also ensure people have their vaccine documentation prior to release .

【89】The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the World Health Organization (WHO) have issued interim guidelines to manage the disease in correctional facilities while preserving human rights , and the WHO has developed a checklist to help correctional facilities respond to COVID-19 . The WHO has also developed a brief on vaccination in correctional facilities .

【90】 **Influenza** – Seasonal influenza vaccination should be made widely available to incarcerated persons as well as correctional staff to prevent and manage outbreaks .

【91】HIV prevalence, prevention, and treatment — Globally, there is a high burden of HIV among the incarcerated population. In a model using 2014 data, it was estimated that 3.8 percent of prisoners worldwide had HIV , with the prevalence of HIV infection estimated at greater than 10 percent in some countries' prison systems . Based upon data reported by correctional authorities to the United States Bureau of Justice Statistics in 2015, approximately 1.3 percent of people in United States prisons report a history of HIV/AIDS .

【92】The incarcerated population is at excess risk for HIV infection compared with the nonincarcerated population due to multiple risk factors including injection drug use, a history of work in the sex industry, or trading sex for drugs .

【93】Attention to infectious disease prevention and HIV treatment in correctional settings is crucial in order to minimize the risk of transmission among residents and correctional staff, since transmission of HIV (as well as hepatitis B and C virus \[HBV, HCV\]) may occur in jails and prisons . Among those who seroconverted while incarcerated, the following risk factors were identified: male-to-male sex, receiving a tattoo while incarcerated, serving a period of incarceration for five or more years, and being from a Black population .

【94】Incarcerated persons may not have access to condoms or clean injection equipment, which can foster HIV transmission. Estimates of sexual assault in prison range from 0 to 40 percent , and nonconsensual sexual activity prevents incarcerated persons from protecting themselves against infection. Needle and syringe exchange programs in correctional settings have been piloted internationally , and condoms could be made available in jails and prisons. It is also imperative that HIV education be provided and made easily accessible .

【95】Guidelines are available to assist in the use of antiretroviral therapy (ART) in HIV-infected adults, in pregnant individuals, and for the prevention and management of opportunistic infections. These guidelines can be accessed at the United States Department of Health and Human Services website . Correctional facilities should consider the use of HIV experts to manage HIV care. Telemedicine may facilitate access to expert guidance.

【96】A few points regarding the management of HIV in the correctional setting warrant emphasis:

【97】 Coinfection with hepatitis B and/or hepatitis C is common among incarcerated individuals with HIV; screening for hepatitis B and C in people with HIV is important .

【98】 For correctional patients already on ART, uninterrupted treatment is essential to prevent the evolution of viral resistance to medications. Patients should continue on the same medications they were taking in the community. Home medication regimens should be provided immediately upon intake into jail or prison, and they should be provided without interruption in dose or schedule.

【99】 For people with HIV not on ART at the time of incarceration, appropriate prophylaxis against opportunistic infections should be provided for patients with low CD4 counts, and ART should be offered to those for whom ART is indicated according to current guidelines.

【100】Establishing HIV care upon release from prison or jail is challenging, but interventions such as novel case-management strategies, increasing access to health insurance and prescription benefits, and improved HIV care during incarceration can all improve post-release retention in HIV care.

【101】 Among 2000 HIV-infected inmates released from the Texas state prison system between 2004 and 2007, only 5 percent filled an initial prescription for ART within 10 days of release and 30 percent within 60 days . Inmates who received help with an application for medication assistance benefits were more likely to fill a prescription. Among the same population, only 28 percent initiated care at an HIV clinic within 90 days of their release . Inmates who received ART during incarceration and who received intensive discharge planning were more likely to enroll in an HIV clinic.

【102】 In a randomized trial of 356 males and transgender females with HIV released from Los Angeles County Jail, a novel peer-navigation intervention was compared with traditional case management . The percentage of individuals maintaining viral suppression over 12 months following release declined from 52 to 30 percent with traditional case management, while it remained unchanged at 49 percent among those participating in the peer navigation intervention.

【103】 In Connecticut, among formerly incarcerated individuals with HIV, retention in post-release HIV care and sustained viral suppression were associated with early post-release care, receipt of ART while incarcerated, health insurance, and an increased number of transitional case-management visits .

【104】Upon release, health care providers and discharge planners should ensure that people with HIV have an adequate supply of medications to last until they can follow up with a community provider. Transfer of the prison medical record to the community provider should be facilitated to ensure that information about the patient's history of HIV treatment is available.

【105】Viral hepatitis (Hepatitis A, B, and C) — Incarcerated individuals may have active hepatitis B or C infection upon intake into a correctional facility, or a new infection with hepatitis A virus (HAV), HBV, and/or HCV may occur while incarcerated. The epidemiology and management of viral hepatitis in the incarcerated population is discussed below.

【106】 **Hepatitis A** – HAV is transmitted by fecal-oral route via household contact, sexual contact, drug use, or contaminated food. The age-adjusted prevalence of HAV in correctional populations is reported to be similar to the prevalence in the general population , but outbreaks have been reported, corresponding to HAV epidemics among injection drug users in the community .

【107】HAV vaccination should be provided to correctional populations at risk for HAV, including men who have sex with men, people who use drugs, and those at high risk from severe adverse outcomes if infected (ie, those with chronic liver disease) . Given the high prevalence of substance use disorder among people in correctional facilities, these recommendations are likely to apply to many individuals. Vaccination should be administered as soon as possible after incarceration, and a system to track completion of the series should be established. Individuals should be encouraged to complete the series at release from prison, and immunization records should be transferred to the community medical provider upon release .

【108】Administration of a combination hepatitis A/B vaccine with an accelerated schedule may be an option for the high-risk incarcerated population. As an example, in a Los Angeles county jail, this immunization program was successfully implemented for men who have sex with men .

【109】People with signs of acute hepatitis should be tested for viral hepatitis. If HAV is identified, close contacts (ie, cell mates, sexual contacts) should be treated with immune globulin for postexposure prophylaxis, and health authorities should be notified .

【110】 **Hepatitis B** – HBV infection (either active infection or evidence of previous infection) is common among people in correctional facilities . In the United States, up to 11 percent of incarcerated individuals were positive for HBsAg (active infection) and up to 43 percent were positive for HBcAb (past or current infection) in one study . Globally, the percentage of the incarcerated population with active HBV infection ranges from 0.15 percent (Mexico) to 26 percent (Ghana) . In 2014, the worldwide prevalence of chronic HBV among prisoners was approximately 5 percent .

【111】Incarcerated individuals are also at risk for acquiring HBV infection during incarceration. In one outbreak of acute HBV infection in a state prison, the identified mechanism of transmission was men having sex with males in the affected dormitory . Over 900 men at the facility were at risk for acquiring HBV infection, with greater than 50 percent reporting at least one risk factor, including having sex with males, sharing a razor, or receiving a tattoo during incarceration.

【112】Postexposure prophylaxis should be available for incarcerated persons who have had a potential exposure to HBV. Chronic HBV infection should be treated according to standard practice and the latest treatment guidelines.

【113】 **Hepatitis C** – HCV infection is common among individuals in correctional facilities . Reported HCV infection rates among the incarcerated have varied from 3.4 percent in Lebanon  to 5 percent in France  and greater than 20 percent in the United States . Estimates suggest that 9.8 percent of people in United States correctional facilities report a history of hepatitis C, but many may not be aware of their serologic status .

【114】People with signs or symptoms of liver disease should be tested for HCV, and people with known HCV should have further evaluation to determine the extent of liver disease and eligibility for treatment. Hepatitis A and B vaccination should be provided to those inmates with HCV who have not already been vaccinated or are not immune or infected. Treatment of substance use disorders is recommended for those people with HCV who are not eligible for treatment due to active drug or alcohol use. Education regarding factors that may contribute to worsening liver disease, such as alcohol intake, is recommended .

【115】Costs of treatment for HCV infection can be a concern given correctional budget constraints, although treatment is feasible in the correctional setting , and one analysis found that treatment in the prison population could be cost-saving . While the Federal Bureau of Prisons has guidance on HCV management in incarcerated persons , there are legal challenges aimed to broaden access to appropriate antiviral therapy .

【116】Further information regarding therapy for HCV is presented elsewhere.

【117】Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus — Methicillin-resistant _Staphylococcus aureus_ (MRSA) is a common cause of skin and soft tissue infections in many correctional systems . In most United States correctional facilities where it has been studied, the prevalence of MRSA is higher than in the general population . Among those incarcerated in the Texas state prison system from 1999 to 2001, the estimated incidence of MRSA was 12 infections per 1000 person years . Risk factors for MRSA in correctional settings include the proportion of people housed with drug offenses, history of antimicrobial use, comorbidities, crowding, and inadequate hygiene .

【118】MRSA transmission has been documented in several correctional systems . Strict attention to hygiene, including wide access to soap, high-temperature laundering and drying of clothing, and timely access to medical care, may prevent the spread of MRSA infections. The CDC also recommends skin screening at intake, skin monitoring, culturing lesions, and using appropriate antibiotic therapy for MRSA . The Federal Bureau of Prisons has issued guidelines on the management of MRSA in federal prisons . In a Georgia detention center, implementation of measures to improve screening for skin disease and improve personal hygiene, wound care, and proper use of antimicrobial therapy decreased the incidence of MRSA .

【119】Tobacco use — Nicotine use disorders are highly prevalent among residents and staff in correctional facilities. More than 14 million people who smoke pass through correctional facilities each year . Most states in the United States have implemented smoking bans in prisons (indoor, outdoor, or both) , but prison smoking bans may not be as common in other countries. In observational studies, smoking bans are associated with improved prison indoor air quality, decreased mortality from smoking-related causes (cardiovascular and pulmonary deaths), and, for bans in place longer than nine years, decreased mortality from tobacco-related cancers . Some correctional facilities allow the use of electronic cigarettes and others ban them due to health concerns .

【120】Resumption of tobacco use after release from prison is common, with self-reported abstinence of only 3.1 percent at six months among individuals with chronic health conditions released from a tobacco-free jail in the community . Smoking cessation programs could have a lasting impact on the health of the incarcerated population. Correctional medical providers should discuss smoking and smoking cessation with their patients. A prison-based multimodal smoking cessation intervention has been found to be feasible in New South Wales .

【121】Opioid use disorder — The majority of individuals with an opioid use disorder or who use heroin report a history of criminal justice involvement at some point over their lifetime . Among those with opioid use disorder, the risk of criminal justice system involvement within the prior year is almost seven times higher than among those without opioid use disorder. For those with heroin use disorder in particular, the risk is almost 15 times higher.

【122】Ideally, opioid use disorder in incarcerated adults should be managed in the same way as in the nonincarcerated population. This includes:

【123】 Management of acute opioid intoxication

【124】 Management of acute withdrawal symptoms

【125】 Initiation or continuation of medication for opioid use disorder (MOUD), both during incarceration and following release

【126】Individuals should have access to treatment for opioid use disorder during incarceration . The WHO recommends that incarcerated individuals should have access to the same treatment options as those available to them in the community, including all forms of MOUD such as methadone , buprenorphine , and naltrexone . The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM) specifically recommends continuing treatment that was begun prior to incarceration .

【127】Appropriate treatment of opioid use disorder in those involved with the criminal justice system has been shown to decrease recidivism, decrease transmission of HIV and hepatitis C infection, improve public safety, and reduce post-release overdoses and deaths . Starting or continuing an individual's maintenance MOUD during incarceration has also been shown to increase the probability of participating in post-release treatment . In a randomized trial of people with opioid use disorder who declined oral MOUD (with buprenorphine or methadone ) at release, treatment with long-acting injectable naltrexone reduced relapse rates at four weeks. .

【128】It is important to arrange for transitional care in anticipation of release, as drug cues in the environment can trigger renewed craving and resumed drug use, increasing the possibility of overdose and death. Among people formerly incarcerated in Washington state prisons between 1999 and 2009, overdose was the leading cause of death post-release, with opioids involved in 15 percent of those deaths . In England, receiving MOUD in prison has been shown to reduce the number of post-release drug-related and all-cause deaths . In a retrospective cohort analysis, participation in a Rhode Island statewide correctional system comprehensive MOUD program (inmates were maintained on MOUD while incarcerated then referred to programs to continue treatment after release) was associated with a 61 percent reduction in post-release overdose deaths .

【129】Naloxone should be available in prisons and jails to prevent in-facility deaths . In addition, the risk of overdose death is highest in the weeks following release from the correctional setting, and some correctional systems have begun to prescribe naloxone to individuals at risk for overdose after release from prison . One quarter of United States jails surveyed in 2019 reported providing naloxone at release to people with opioid use disorder . In 2011, Scotland implemented a program to provide education and naloxone to people at risk for an opioid overdose prior to their release from prison. This program was associated with a significant reduction in post-release death from opioids in the first month after prison release . These results suggest that providing overdose risk reduction education and prescribing naloxone to people at risk for overdose is an effective strategy to reduce the risk of opioid overdose after release; this strategy is now recommended by ASAM .

【130】Unfortunately, the majority of people with opioid use disorders do not receive treatment either while incarcerated or after release . "Forced withdrawal" has been demonstrated to be harmful, causing suffering and increasing the risk of overdose death ; updated guidelines for treatment of opioid use disorder in correctional facilities recommend against forced withdrawal .

【131】Barriers to receiving appropriate care include punitive attitudes, cost of treatment, concerns over medication diversion, and federal regulations that limit methadone prescribing to licensed opioid treatment programs . Methadone and buprenorphine are not widely prescribed in correctional settings, although the National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC) has the authority to accredit opioid treatment programs in correctional institutions. Several organizations have published guidance or policy statements regarding managing MOUD in jails and relating to other justice-involved populations .

【132】Compared with buprenorphine , methadone is more available in state and federal prisons but is more commonly used in pregnant individuals who have opioid use disorders and for short-term detoxification rather than for maintenance therapy .

【133】Other drug and alcohol use disorders — The National Institute on Drug Abuse in the United States has published principles for treatment of drug use disorders in the criminal justice population  . In a 2012 review of drug treatment programs for criminal justice populations, there was evidence to support the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy, contingency management, therapeutic communities, and drug courts, in addition to the use of medications .

【134】For criminal justice involved patients with alcohol use disorder (AUD), evidence supporting the benefit of naltrexone treatment is mixed, and treatment rates are low. As an example, in a trial of prisoners with AUD, extended-release naltrexone started prior to release from prison only showed benefit for the younger subgroup (ages 20 to 29), with reduction in time to heavy drinking and reduction in alcohol use, but no benefit for the overall group . Among US Veterans Health Administration patients with AUD, overall rates of treatment with naltrexone are low, although higher among those with criminal justice involvement than among those without  .

【135】Psychiatric disorders — Globally, psychiatric disorders, particularly schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, are far more prevalent among incarcerated individuals than the general population . Among those incarcerated in United States prisons, half have at least one mental health condition, while the prevalence of severe mental illness in this population is estimated at 15 to 24 percent . In Texas prisons, people with bipolar disorder were 3.3 times more likely to have had four or more previous incarcerations compared with people with no major psychiatric disorder.

【136】Cooccurring severe mental disorders, substance use disorders, and antisocial personality disorders  add complexity to the management of mental illness in corrections. A history of trauma is common among people in prison, particularly females . Mood disorders and personality disorders are also prevalent . Suicide was the leading cause of death in jail inmates in the United States in 2014 .

【137】In the United States, people in correctional facilities with severe psychiatric disorders receive mandated mental health care . The management of psychiatric disorders in prisons and jails often requires specialty input from forensic psychiatrists. Management of psychiatric conditions in prison should continue into solitary confinement settings such as "Supermax" facilities .

【138】Of crucial importance is ensuring the continuity of mental health care after release from incarceration. In a cohort study of released prisoners in Sweden, rates of violent reoffending were lower during periods when people received psychotropic medications (antipsychotics, psychostimulants, and/or drugs to treat substance use disorder) compared with periods when they were not medicated (hazard ratio \[HR\] 0.58, 95% CI 0.39-0.88) .

【139】Sexual violence — Sexual violence (including staff-on-inmate and inmate-on-inmate) experienced during incarceration is common. Estimates of sexual assault in prison range from 0 to 40 percent and vary based upon reporting approaches . The Bureau of Justice Statistics measures the incidence of sexual victimization involving other inmates or staff in compliance with the Prison Rape Elimination Act .

【140】Health care providers should report abuse, counsel victims, treat injuries, arrange for follow-up, and gather forensic evidence when seeing a sexual assault victim either on- or off-site . Facilities should develop protocols for appropriate management of abuse. Methods to prevent sexual violence among the incarcerated deserve further study.

【141】Pregnancy — In the United States, adult and adolescent females are the fastest-growing population in prisons and jails, and management of the pregnant incarcerated individual presents special challenges . Prenatal care for incarcerated people is discussed in detail separately.

【142】Special needs to be considered for pregnant people in jail or prison include levels of work activity, housing issues (lower bunk bed), nutritional needs, vitamin supplementation, drug and alcohol treatment, smoking cessation, screening for infections, and mental health issues. The use of shackles for pregnant people has been barred in several states and in federal facilities except in extreme situations, due to concerns of safety related to balance issues, as well as postural needs during labor and delivery. Maternal and fetal outcomes for incarcerated compared with nonincarcerated females in similar populations, are generally improved, with higher birth weights and lower rates of stillbirth .

【143】Postpartum issues relate to difficulties with breastfeeding and the lack of nursery facilities in most prisons leading to need for newborn foster care. Providing reproductive planning services prior to release is an important issue, since unplanned conception within 90 days of leaving jail is common and females who choose not to become pregnant are more likely to initiate contraception when provided in the prison than when offered free in the community .

【144】Cancer — Cancer diagnoses are increased among the incarcerated compared with the general population . In one population, the most prevalent cancers were lung cancer, non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), and cancers of the oral cavity and pharynx . Cervical cancer was the most common cancer in females. In addition to increased prevalence, median survival for lung, hepatic, and NHL cancer was lower in the incarcerated population, compared with an age-matched population .

【145】Cancer was the leading cause of death among deaths occurring in United States prisons in 2018 , with lung cancer the leading cause of cancer death both during incarceration and after release . Correctional health care workers should provide smoking cessation counseling, monitor for early signs and symptoms of lung cancer in current and former smokers, and offer lung cancer screening according to guidelines as in the general population.

【146】Other cancer screening for inmates in long-term facilities should be performed according to guidelines for screening in the general population. Cancer screening in short-term facilities may be an opportunity to provide preventive services to a population with high risk for cervical cancer and lower colon cancer than the general population .

【147】Geriatric populations — An increasing concern is management of the health needs of older people in prisons, a growing population in the criminal justice system . Prisons are generally not prepared to address the aging prisoner with medical comorbidities, functional impairment, or cognitive impairments, or to provide palliative care services when needed. Designated facilities that meet the special needs of older incarcerated individuals identified with functional impairments or geriatric syndromes may be one way to manage this problem, in conjunction with evaluation of the older adults in prisons for functional and cognitive limitations.

【148】PROVIDE ROUTINE HEALTH CARE MAINTENANCE 

【149】Incarceration presents an opportunity to provide preventive services to a high-risk population who may otherwise have poor access to care. Routine health care maintenance, as would be offered to patients in the community, is indicated for the incarcerated, including age-appropriate cancer screening and vaccinations . Additionally, incarceration offers an opportunity to address lifestyle issues for a vulnerable population. In a systematic review of noncommunicable diseases among people in prisons in 15 countries, female prisoners in the United States and Australia had a greater likelihood of obesity compared with the general population, salt intake was more than twice the recommended levels for prisoners in nine studies, and levels of physical activity for prisoners varied by country .

【150】Incarceration itself has been associated with an increased risk for hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy, after adjustment for other risk factors . This underscores the need to provide health care screening to incarcerated persons, a population more likely to be medically underserved upon release. Additionally, incarcerated females are at high risk for sexually transmitted infections and unplanned pregnancy, and attention to reproductive health needs in this population could benefit the individuals as well as their community outside the prison .

【151】SPECIFIC ETHICAL ISSUES 

【152】Ethical concerns arise frequently in any medical practice, but there can be particular challenges in providing care to the incarcerated patient. Correctional health care professionals have obligations to their patients but may report to and be supervised by correctional administrators rather than public health or health care systems. This raises potential issues with "dual loyalty," which may be addressed through training, oversight, and integration of correctional health services with public health services . Specific ethical issues to be addressed here are pain management, hunger strikes, end-of-life care, and solitary confinement.

【153】Pain management — Pain management can be complex in the correctional setting. Providers fear prescription drug misuse and diversion in the setting of poor patient credibility and history of substance use disorder in the correctional setting . Patients may have difficulty trusting providers and fear inadequate pain control.

【154】Institutional factors, including security protocols and formulation restrictions, often present barriers to adequate pain management for people in prisons and jails .

【155】For new entrants into the correctional facility, communication with outside providers who prescribe chronic pain medications to patients in the community is paramount. In addition, follow-up medical visits to assess the adequacy of pain relief with prescribed therapy may be helpful to build trust between provider and patient.

【156】Hunger strikes — Complex practical and ethical concerns complicate the medical management in jails and prisons. A hunger strike, in which a patient who has the capacity to understand the potential medical impact of food refusal and who is not suicidal refuses food for a specific reason, is one example. The medical management of patients on hunger strike should include psychiatric consultation, a medical history and evaluation, assessment of motives for food refusal and the possibility of coercion, and the prisoner's understanding of the risks and benefits of the food refusal . The person on hunger strike should finalize an advanced directive, to be followed in the event of their becoming incompetent, to express wishes.

【157】Clinician assessment is often initiated after 72 hours of food refusal. In prison, people on hunger strike may accept water, salt, sugar, and vitamin B1. Some may accept liquid nutritional supplements. Refusal of both food and water is unusual, because a rapid death would not allow negotiation to meet demands.

【158】Weight loss of approximately 18 percent of initial weight can result in serious medical problems; loss of more than 30 percent is life-threatening . Force-feeding a malnourished individual can result in refeeding syndrome, characterized by electrolyte abnormalities including hypophosphatemia, fluid retention, and hyperglycemia.

【159】The World Medical Association Declaration of Malta states that forced feeding is unethical . The 8th Amendment to the Constitution in the United States prohibits cruel and unusual punishment and has been variably interpreted to permit forced feeding in certain situations, often involving the court system. Clinicians in correctional environments may need to balance divergent ethical principles such as respecting the sanctity of life and respect for individual autonomy. Guidance on such issues has been provided by thoughtful articles in the literature . Position statements from the World Medical Association  and other medical associations are also available to guide clinicians. Generally, states have been successful when they have argued that their responsibility to preserve life outweighs the individuals' right to starve themselves.

【160】End-of-life care — Issues and challenges surrounding the care of terminally ill individuals within the correctional system are reviewed in detail elsewhere.

【161】Solitary confinement — Among other recommendations, the National Commission on Correctional Health Care (NCCHC) recommends that the use of solitary confinement be limited to 15 or less consecutive days and avoided in juveniles, individuals with mental disorders, and pregnant individuals. They further recommend that health staff should not be involved in making determinations of fitness for solitary confinement .

【162】HIGH MORTALITY RATES IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING RELEASE 

【163】There is a high risk of death in the immediate period following release from jail or prison, with the greatest risk of death from drug overdose . As examples:

【164】 In Scotland, the risk of drug-related death was higher in the first two weeks following release from prison relative to the subsequent two weeks (relative risk \[RR\] 7.4, 95% CI 3.3-16.3) . Additionally, the risk of non-drug-related death in the same two-week period was nearly five times the rate expected.

【165】 In the state of Washington, the adjusted risk of death in the first two weeks following prison release was substantially higher than that of other state residents (RR 12.7, 95% CI 9.2-17.4) . Drug overdose was the most common cause of death. Death rates remained elevated compared with the general population over the subsequent two years.

【166】 In New York City, the risk of drug-related death in the first two weeks following release from incarceration was eight times the death rate of nonincarcerated individuals adjusted for age, sex, race, and neighborhood . The rate was highest in persons with a history of homelessness.

【167】BARRIERS TO CARE AFTER RELEASE 

【168】Barriers to care following release from incarceration, including poverty, homelessness, lack of health insurance, and medical practice discrimination, can interfere with the establishment of routine medical care post-release. Referrals to medical providers and assistance in establishing medical care in the community should be facilitated whenever possible.

【169】Communication between medical providers both inside and outside of correctional facilities, and between different correctional facilities, is critical to prevent disruptions in medical care with potential negative health consequences.

【170】Despite a high rate of medical and psychiatric illness, many individuals do not receive timely medical care post-incarceration. While 80 percent of released individuals have chronic medical, psychiatric, or substance use disorders, only 15 to 25 percent had a clinician visit (other than to an emergency department) within the first year after release . In a study of Medicare beneficiaries released from correctional facilities, rates of hospitalization within one week to three months post-release were twice the rates for matched controls.

【171】It may be difficult for recently released inmates to obtain appointments with medical providers in the community. As an example, Canadian researchers posing as new patients telephoned for appointments at family practitioner offices, with some callers self-identifying as having been recently released from incarceration . Those identifying as former prisoners were less likely to be offered an appointment than those not identifying as such .

【172】Employing a cooperative program of dually based medical providers who work in both corrections and in community clinics can improve continuity and access to care .

【173】Risk of homelessness following prison release should also be addressed, since homeless shelters are used by 6 to 11 percent of people after release, and homelessness increases risk for medical illness and mortality . Appropriate discharge planning for people leaving prisons is indicated, including referral to community drug treatment programs and housing services .

【174】Links to society and government-sponsored guidelines from selected countries and regions around the world are provided separately.

【175】 **Principles of health care in correctional settings** – Health care in the correctional system should be delivered based upon the best evidence for effective care as it is in the general population. Specific treatment decisions may also reflect concerns for patient safety, optimal use of available resources, and public health considerations.

【176】 **Health screenings upon correctional facility intake** – Screening upon entry into a correctional facility should include assessment for potential drug and alcohol withdrawal, injuries, conditions that may have an immediate flare or require continuing medication therapy, suicide risk, transmissible diseases, and pregnancy.

【177】 **Screening for infectious diseases** – Particular attention should be paid to screening for COVID-19, HIV infection, viral hepatitis, chlamydia, gonorrhea, _Trichomonas vaginalis_ , syphilis, and tuberculosis (TB). Some of these infections are more prevalent among the incarcerated than in the general population, and all can be transmitted within correctional facilities if not identified and appropriately managed.

【178】 **Chronic disease management** – Management of chronic disease in this population should not be compromised due to incarceration. Maintenance medications for underlying conditions should be continued without interruption.

【179】 **Opportunity to provide preventative and health care maintenance** **services** – Incarceration presents an opportunity to provide preventive services to a high-risk population who may otherwise have poor access to care. Routine health care maintenance, as would be offered to patients in the community, is indicated for the incarcerated, including age-appropriate cancer screening and vaccinations.

【180】 **Post-release risks and barriers to care** – The period immediately following release presents a high risk for drug overdose and other fatal events. Management of opioid use disorder with medication (continued or initiated during incarceration) with plans made for transition of care to the community is one strategy to mitigate this risk. In addition, barriers to care following release from incarceration, including poverty, homelessness, lack of health insurance, and medical practice discrimination, can interfere with the establishment of routine medical care post-release. Referrals to medical providers and assistance in establishing medical care in the community should be facilitated whenever possible.焦瀚远

====================================================================================================
